Statement of Agreed Facts:
The parties have agreed that the following key facts are not in dispute. 


THE ACCUSED ANTE HORVAT
Ante Horvat was born on 22 May 1944 in Skradin, Croatia. After joining the Yugoslav People’s Army, he graduated from the Ground Forces Military Academy in 1966 and became an officer. Shortly after the conflict in the former Yugoslavia began, Horvat became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army within the newly formed Croatian Army (“HV”) based in Knin, Croatia. On 26 August 1993, the President of Croatia appointed Horvat as Chief of the HV General Staff, a position which made him the most senior officer in the HV. He held this position until his mandatory retirement from the HV in 2004, when he became Croatian vice-chairman of the Croatian-Bosnian Reconciliation Commission. THE INDICTMENT Horvat was charged on the basis of individual criminal responsibility (Article 7(1) of the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, hereinafter “the Statute”) with aiding and abetting crimes in the Bosnian towns of Mostar and Ahmići by facilitating the provision of military and logistical assistance from the HV to the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna (“HVO”). The HVO was an armed group of ethnic Croats in the Bosnian civil war. Horvat was also charged with superior responsibility (Article 7(3) of the Statute); since he was acquitted of these charges and this part of the decision is not on appeal, however, no further mention will be made of the facts underlying this part of the indictment.


THE UNDERLYING CRIMES COMMITTED BY HVO 
The underlying events took place in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the period between August 1993 and November 1995. 
MOSTAR From September 1992 to November 1995, the HVO conducted a lengthy campaign of shelling and sniping in Mostar which resulted in the deaths of hundreds of civilians and the wounding of thousands of others. 
AHMIĆI In the spring of 1993, the HVO invaded the village of Ahmići, which the United Nations Security Council had previously established as a safe area for civilians. After taking over Ahmići, the HVO proceeded to forcibly remove and massacre hundreds of Muslim civilians and persons not taking an active part in hostilities. 


THE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY HORVAT 
Since August 1993, Horvat oversaw the HV’s provision of extensive logistic assistance to the HVO as the HV’s Chief of General Staff. Logistic assistance notably included vast quantities of infantry and artillery ammunition, fuel, spare parts, training and technical assistance. The Croatian National Security Council granted Horvat and the Croatian Army the authority to provide logistic assistance to the HVO. Even though Horvat was not officially a member of the Croatian National Security Council, he participated in the Council’s meetings, along with its members, notably Franjo Tuđman and Stjepan Mesić, who at the time held the titles of President of Croatia and President of the Republic of Croatia, respectively. Horvat regularly urged the Council to continue providing logistic assistance to the HVO, insisting that they could not wage war without significant military support. A-5 A large number of HVO officers were drawn from the ranks of the Croatian Army. They officially remained members of the Croatian Army even as they were fighting in Bosnia under the banners of the HVO. Horvat proposed and carefully implemented the idea of creating “Personnel Centres” to regularise the status of these officers and allow them to lawfully remain part of the Croatian Army. HVO officers retained their salaries and benefits as Croatian Army members through what was known as the 30th Personnel Centre. Horvat was well aware that the payment of salaries was, in his own words, of “great help” to the HVO. 


HORVAT’S STATE OF MIND 
Horvat knew that the HVO’s operations encompassed grave crimes against civilians. Horvat received information from a variety of sources concerning the HVO’s criminal behaviour and discriminatory intent against Muslims. Under Horvat’s direction, the Croatian Army’s intelligence and security organs monitored the views of the international community and international media concerning the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Croatian Army General Staff also received diplomatic reports about proceedings at the United Nations Security Council concerning grave abuses against civilians by HVO forces in Mostar and other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, Horvat was alerted to the fact that the HVO was conducting a campaign of sniping and shelling against civilians during its siege of Mostar. These regular attacks were well documented and widely reported for a period of three years. 


THE TRIAL JUDGMENT 
On 7 January 2014, the Trial Chamber found defendant-appellant Horvat guilty of aiding and abetting the following crimes committed by members of the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići: murder, inhumane acts (injuring and wounding civilians, inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer), and persecutions as crimes against humanity; and murder and attacks on civilians as violations of the laws or customs of war. The Trial Chamber sentenced Horvat to a single term of 25 years of imprisonment under Articles 3, 5, and 7(1) of the Statute."


Brief for the Accused:
I. Introduction
1. This appeal concerns a single point of law: whether or not aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the
Statute governing this Tribunal requires that the assistance be specifically directed to the commission of a
crime.
2. The prosecution agrees that the defendant must be acquitted if specific direction was required, as the
defendant merely provided unspecific support to the forces committing the crimes on the ground.
3. The Trial Chamber, however, convicted the defendant because it did not consider specific direction an
essential element of aiding and abetting. We urge the Appeals Chamber to overturn this decision because it is inconsistent with prior decisions of the Appeals Chamber, the most fundamental principles of the Statute, and sound policy.
II. “Specific direction” is a component of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. 
4. If there was ever any doubt about the requirement of “specific direction,” it was laid to rest by the Appeals Chamber’s Vasiljević decision handed down two weeks after the Trial judgment in the present case. The Vasiljević decision expressly required “specific direction” as part of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. Distinguishing aiding and abetting from joint criminal enterprise (JCE), the Appeals Chamber stated in Vasiljević: “The aider and abettor carries out acts specifically directed to assist, encourage or lend moral support to the perpetration of a certain specific crime (murder, extermination, rape, torture, wanton destruction of civilian property, etc.), and this support has a substantial effect upon the perpetration of the crime. By contrast, it is sufficient for a participant in a joint criminal enterprise to perform acts that in some way are directed to the furtherance of the common design.” (emphasis added) 
5. The Appeals Chamber thus explicitly acknowledged that criminal liability does not attach to the mere assistance to a military group, even if that assistance had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. Rather, the actus reus of aiding and abetting is assistance specifically directed at the commission of a crime.
6. It is true that not all prior decisions of the Appeals Chamber concerning aiding and abetting explicitly mention the element of specific direction. We submit, however, that specific direction has always been implicit in the finding that the accused provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator that had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. Specific direction was never in doubt in previous cases because the accused was at or proximate to the crime scene.
7. In contrast, in cases where the conduct of the accused is remote in relation to the commission of the crimes, the requirement of specific direction as an explicit element of aiding and abetting is manifest. This is especially important in this case, as Horvat is not accused of providing assistance to the commission of crimes committed by the HV. Rather, he is accused of facilitating the commission of crimes committed by the HVO, a separate military organization not under his personal command and not even part of the same command hierarchy.
8. The additional element of aiding and abetting follows from the general principles governing the ICTY Statute. One of those principles is, as is generally accepted, that the Statute does not criminalise the waging of war per se. States provide military and technical assistance to one another with varying strategic objectives in a number of regions around the world. However, this aid in itself does not render the leaders of the assisting states individually criminally responsible for aiding and abetting crimes committed during such wars. To be held individually criminally responsible, the leaders must be shown to have committed or aided and abetted the commission of some crimes during the war, an act which is distinct, and apart, from the mere provision of military assistance. To conclude otherwise, as the Trial Chamber has done, is to criminalise the waging of war, which is not a crime according to the Statute of the Tribunal. Any provision of weapons would result in the individual criminal responsibility of the provider, approaching a form of strict liability.
9. Moreover, dispensing with the requirement of specific direction, as the Trial Chamber did, leads to absurd consequences. It would potentially ensnare all military and political leaders who approve logistical assistance to a foreign army without the power to control every decision of that foreign army, in particular the intensity of its efforts to curb human rights violations. This would have a substantial chilling effect on all legitimate international military operations. III. Conclusion
10. From the very beginning of this case, the defendant has expressed his deep regret at all bloodshed in this tragic war, and in particular at the inexcusable crimes of certain soldiers and officers in the field. He categorically denies, however, that he is personally responsible for those crimes. We urge the Appeals Chamber to affirm that the law is on the side of the defendant and others forced by history to make difficult decisions in times of war, and to overturn the conviction by the Trial Chamber.
11. For these reasons, Horvat respectfully requests that the Appeals Chamber: (i) hold that the actus reus of aiding and abetting in international law requires specific direction; (ii) apply that standard; and (iii) reverse the Trial Chamber’s judgment and enter an acquittal.


Brief for the Prosecution:
I. Introduction
1. The defense requests that the Appeals Chamber reverse the Trial Chamber’s judgment on the grounds that the assistance provided by Horvat was not specifically directed at the war crimes committed by the HVO.
2. The defense’s argument is without merit. The Trial Chamber correctly found Horvat guilty of aiding and abetting under Article 7 of the Statute governing this Tribunal because Horvat provided logistical and personnel assistance to the HVO in full knowledge that the HVO committed atrocious war crimes, as Horvat knew fully well.
3. It is irrelevant that none of Horvat’s acts were specifically directed toward the commission of the war crimes by the HVO. Specific direction is not an element of aiding and abetting. The defense’s argument to the contrary is a transparent attempt to introduce a novel, restrictive element to the actus reus of aiding and abetting that has no basis in previous cases and that would make it more difficult to convict those who knowingly facilitate the most grievous crimes. We urge the Appeals Chamber to reject this attempt to undermine the very purpose of this Tribunal to hold to account those responsible for the horrors of the Yugoslav wars.
II. ”Specific Direction” is not a requirement of aiding and abetting liability
4. The defense’s only legal argument is a quotation taken out of context from the Appeals Chamber’s recent decision in the Vasiljević case. The discussion in Vasiljević, however, was not concerned with systematically defining aiding and abetting liability. Vasiljević merely mentioned aiding and abetting in the context of defining a different basis for criminal liability, namely joint criminal enterprise. To better define the latter, the Vasiljević decision drew comparisons to the former. Nothing in that discussion suggests that specific direction is a stand-alone element of aiding and abetting. Indeed, the defense implicitly concedes that no prior decision of this Tribunal has ever denied aiding and abetting liability merely because the assistance was not specifically directed at the crime.
5. The prosecution agrees that the defendant’s physical distance from the crime scene may be relevant for aiding and abetting liability. However, this follows from the simple fact that in these situations the assistance is less likely to have a substantial effect on the main act. The prosecution submits that the proximity of an alleged aider and abettor to crimes committed by the principal perpetrators is one factor that a trial chamber may consider in determining whether substantial contribution is established. If such effect is established, however, there can be no doubt that the assistance qualifies as aiding and abetting if the accused knows that it facilitates the commission of war crimes.
6. Moreover, requiring specific direction would make it almost impossible to prosecute aiding and abetting in practice. The only assistance that is clearly specifically directed at a crime is assistance that cannot be used for anything but criminal activity. It is doubtful whether, in real life, such assistance exists; surely it is rare. There is, however, much conduct that significantly contributes to crime even though it may seem harmless on its face (e.g. transferring money or seconding personnel). Such conduct should not be shielded from criminal liability merely because these acts might further both lawful and unlawful activities. The critical question is whether the assistance was provided with knowledge of the crimes and had an actual, substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime by its beneficiaries. In particular, the provision of weapons as a peculiar kind of assistance is never “neutral.” 
7. The defense submits that under the approach favoured by the Trial Chamber, any provision of weapons would result in individual criminal responsibility of the provider, approaching a form of strict liability. However, this fear is unfounded. In order for aiding and abetting liability to arise, a number of additional elements need to be present: one or more crimes must have been actually perpetrated; the weapons provided must have substantially contributed to the perpetration; and the weapons-provider must have been aware of their likely use. The fact that they could have theoretically been used in lawful activities would not be decisive in this assessment. 
III. Conclusion
8. For the reasons stated above, the Prosecution respectfully requests that the Appeals Chamber: (i) hold that the actus reus of aiding and abetting in international law does not require specific direction; (ii) and uphold the Trial Chamber’s judgment.