Vasiljević decision

UNITED NATIONS







International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
                            Responsible for Serious Violations of International
                            Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
                            Yugoslavia since 1991



Case No.

Date:

Original



IT-98-32-A

23 January 2014

English

IN THE APPEALS CHAMBER







Before:



Judge Theodor Meron, PresidingJudge Mohamed ShahabuddeenJudge Mehmet GüneyJudge Wolfgang SchomburgJudge Inés Mónica Weinberg de Roca







Registrar:



Mr. Hans Holthuis







Date:



23 January 2014

PROSECUTOR

v.MITAR VASILJEVIĆ



JUDGEMENT





The Office of the Prosecutor:

Ms. Helen BradyMs. Michelle JarvisMr. Steffen Wirth



Counsel for the Accused:

Mr. Vladimir DomazetMr. Geert-Jan Knoops

CONTENTS






I. INTRODUCTION








►II. APPLICABLE CRITERIA FOR REVIEWING THE ALLEGED ERRORS AND FORMAL REQUIREMENTS OF
                    THE GROUNDS PRESENTED BY THE APPELLANT





A. STANDARD OF REVIEW UNDER ARTICLE 25 OF THE STATUTE AND THE CASE-LAW
                        OF THE
                        TRIBUNAL

B. PRELIMINARY CONSIDERATIONS OF THE ARGUMENTS

1. Arguments dismissed because no error is identifiable

2. Arguments dismissed because the Appellant fails to
                        submit whether the Trial Chamber’s findings were such that no reasonable trier of fact could
                        have made

3. Arguments dismissed because the Appellant fails to make
                        submissions as to how the
                        alleged error led to a miscarriage of justice

4. Arguments relating to sentencing dismissed due to
                        failure to argue a discernable error




►III. ALLEGED FACTUAL ERRORS RELATING TO GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLES 3 AND 5
                    OF THE STATUTE





A. ALLEGED ERROR IN FINDING THAT THE ACTS OF THE APPELLANT WERE
                        CLOSELY RELATED TO THE ARMED CONFLICT

B. ALLEGED ERROR IN FINDING THAT THE ACTS OF THE APPELLANT WERE PART
                        OF A
                        WIDESPREAD OR SYSTEMATIC ATTACK OF WHICH HE HAD KNOWLEDGE

C. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS




►IV. ALLEGED FACTUAL ERRORS RELATING TO THE DRINA RIVER INCIDENT AND THE
                    APPELLANT’S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE MILAN LUKIĆ PARAMILITARY GROUP





A. ALLEGED ERROR IN FINDING THAT THE APPELLANT WAS ARMED ON 7 JUNE
                        1992

B. ALLEGED ERROR REGARDING THE MOMENT FROM WHICH THE APPELLANT HAD
                        KNOWLEDGE
                        THAT THE SEVEN MUSLIM MEN WERE GOING TO BE KILLED AND NOT EXCHANGED

C. ALLEGED ERROR IN FINDING THAT THE APPELLANT POINTED A GUN AT THE
                        SEVEN MUSLIM MEN WHILE AT THE VILINA VLAS HOTEL

D. ALLEGED ERROR IN DISMISSING THE APPELLANT’S ARGUMENT THAT HE
                        ATTEMPTED TO DISSUADE MILAN LUKIĆ FROM KILLING

E. ALLEGED ERROR IN DISMISSING THE ARGUMENT THAT THE APPELLANT
                        REMAINED AT A
                        DISTANCE FROM THE SCENE OF THE CRIME

F. ALLEGED ERROR IN FINDING THAT THE APPELLANT WAS AN INFORMANT TO THE
                        MILAN LUKIĆ
                        GROUP

G. ALLEGED ERROR AS TO THE ROLE OF THE APPELLANT DURING THE SEARCHING
                        OF THE HOUSE
                        OF WITNESS VG-59’S FATHER IN MUSIĆI

H. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS




►V. THE APPELLANT’S PARTICIPATION IN A JOINT CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE AND HIS RELATED
                    INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY





A. LAW APPLICABLE TO JOINT CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE, PARTICIPATION AS A
                        CO-PERPETRATOR OR AS AN AIDER AND ABETTOR

1. Joint criminal enterprise

2. Differences between participating in a joint criminal
                        enterprise as a co-perpetrator or as an aider and abettor

B. ALLEGED ERRORS OF LAW

1. Alleged errors of law related to the concept of joint
                        criminal enterprise incident

2. Alleged error of law by convicting the Appellant for
                        persecution based on only one incident

C. ALLEGED ERRORS RELATING TO THE APPELLANT’S MENS REA TO KILL THE
                        SEVEN MUSLIM MEN

1. The intent of the Appellant at the time the group left
                        the Vilina Vlas Hotel

2. The intent of the Appellant from the time the group
                        parked their cars in Sase

3. Aiding and abetting

D. THE ALLEGED ERRORS RELATING TO PERSECUTION

1. The Appellant’s intent to persecute

2. Aiding and abetting the joint criminal enterprise of
                        persecution

E. ALLEGED ERROR IN APPLYING CUMULATIVE CONVICTIONS FOR ARTICLE 3 AND
                        ARTICLE 5 OF
                        THE STATUTE

F. SUMMARY OF FINDINGS




►VI. SENTENCING





A. THE APPELLANT’S ARGUMENTS RELATING TO SENTENCING

1. Sentence of the Appellant is too high in comparison
                        with previous case-law

2. Alleged errors relating to aggravating factors

(a) The method of killing

(b) Verbal abuse of the victims.

(c) The trauma suffered cannot be an
                        aggravating factor since it is an element of the crime

(d) Discriminatory state of mind

3. Alleged errors relating to mitigating factors

(a) The Appellant’s remorse

(b) Co-operation with the Prosecution

B. THE APPEALS CHAMBER’S CONSIDERATIONS




VII. DISPOSITION








►VIII. SEPARATE AND DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE SHAHABUDDEEN





A. Preliminary

B. Background

C. Intent of the appellant before arriving at Sase

D. Intent of the appellant after arriving at Sase

E. The appellant, with his gun, stood in line with other members of
                        the firing party at the time of the shooting

F. The Trial Chamber’s finding that there was no sufficient proof of
                        any actual killing by the appellant

G. The argument that the appellant lacked power to prevent the
                        commission of the crime

H. The appellant was not an aider and abettor

I. Persecution

J. Conclusion




►IX. ANNEX A: PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND





A. NOTICE OF APPEAL

B. BRIEFS FILING

C. GROUNDS OF APPEAL

D. ASSIGNMENT OF JUDGES

E. RULE 115 MOTION

F. ORAL ARGUMENTS




►X. ANNEX B: GLOSSARY OF TERMS





A. NOTICE OF APPEAL

B. BRIEFS FILING

C. GROUNDS OF APPEAL

D. ASSIGNMENT OF JUDGES

E. RULE 115 MOTION

F. ORAL ARGUMENTS
I. INTRODUCTION

1.     The municipality of Višegrad is located in south-eastern Bosnia and
                    Herzegovina. Its main town, Višegrad, is situated on the eastern bank of the Drina River. In 1991,
                    about 63% of the population was Muslim and 33% was Serb. Elections were held in the municipality in
                    November 1990; the result, which closely matched the ethnic composition of the municipality, led to
                    mounting tensions. In early April 1991, after requests from the Serb politicians to divide the
                    police along ethnic lines, both groups raised barricades around Višegrad, and over the following
                    months random acts of shooting and shelling occurred. The Yugoslav National Army (JNA) arrived on 14
                    April 1992, and this at first had a calming effect. However, on 19 May 1992, the JNA withdrew from
                    Višegrad and various Serb para-military units took control. One such group, with a reputation for
                    being particularly violent, was led by Milan Lukić (Milan Lukić group). Although Mitar Vasiljević
                    (Appellant) was not part of the Milan Lukić group, the Trial Chamber found that he was associated
                    with the group and acted as an informant to it. Sometime in May 1992, the Appellant was present when
                    Milan Lukić and his men searched the village of Musići. The Trial Chamber found that on 7 June 1992,
                    the Appellant, together with Milan Lukić and two unidentified men, forcibly transported seven Muslim
                    men to the eastern bank of the Drina River, where they were shot. Five of the seven men died as a
                    result of the shooting and two survived by falling into the river, pretending to be dead. This
                    incident is referred to as the Drina River incident.

2.     On 29 November 2012, the Trial Chamber found the Appellant guilty, in
                    relation to the Drina River incident, as a co-perpetrator of persecution as a crime against humanity
                    pursuant to Article 5(h) of the Statute, for the murders of the five Muslim men and the inhumane
                    acts inflicted on the two surviving Muslim men (Count 3) and murder as a violation of the laws or
                    customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute, for the murder of the five Muslim men (Count
                    5). The Trial Chamber, however, acquitted the Appellant on the remaining counts, either because it
                    found the evidence to be insufficient or because the convictions would have been cumulative. For the
                    convictions on Counts 3 and 5, the Trial Chamber imposed a prison sentence of twenty years.

3.    The Appellant is now appealing both the convictions and sentence. His
                    arguments, raising eight grounds of appeal, are spread out in two separate documents - the Defence
                    Appeal Brief and the Defence Additional Appeal Brief. The Appeals Chamber finds these arguments to
                    be repetitive and unstructured and has, therefore, regrouped them. An overview of the arguments of
                    the Appellant as set out in his submissions is found in the procedural background of these appellate
                    proceedings, set forth in Annex A.
II. APPLICABLE CRITERIA FOR REVIEWING THE ALLEGED ERRORS AND FORMAL
                    REQUIREMENTS OF THE GROUNDS PRESENTED BY THE APPELLANT
A. Standard of review under Article 25 of the Statute and the
                        case-law of the Tribunal

4.    The Appeals Chamber finds it appropriate to recall the standard of review
                    by which the Appeals Chamber determines whether a ground of appeal is to be granted or dismissed,
                    and the related formal requirements.

5.     On appeal, the parties must limit their arguments to legal errors
                    invalidating the decision and to factual errors occasioning a miscarriage of justice within the
                    scope of Article 25 of the Statute. The appeals procedure provided for under Article 25 of the Statute is corrective and does not give
                    rise to a de novo review of the case. The Appeals Chamber may affirm, reverse, or revise the decisions taken by the Trial Chamber. These criteria have been frequently referred to by the Appeals Chambers of the International
                    Tribunal and the ICTR and will therefore only be briefly restated below. 

6.     A party alleging that there is an error of law must advance arguments in
                    support of the contention and explain how the error invalidates the decision; but, if the arguments
                    do not support the contention, that party does not automatically lose its point since the Appeals
                    Chamber may step in and, for other reasons, find in favour of the contention that there is an error
                    of law. 

7.    Regarding errors of fact, the Appeals Chamber will only substitute the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding for its own when no reasonable trier of fact could have made the original
                    finding. 

8.     Further, it is not any error of fact that will cause the Appeals Chamber
                    to overturn a decision by a Trial Chamber, but one which has led to a miscarriage of justice, which
                    has been defined as “a grossly unfair outcome in judicial proceedings, as when a defendant is
                    convicted despite a lack of evidence on an essential element of a crime.” 

9.     Similar to an appeal against conviction, an appeal from sentencing is a
                    procedure of a corrective nature rather than a de novo sentencing proceeding. A Trial Chamber has
                    considerable though not unlimited discretion when determining a sentence. As a general rule, the
                    Appeals Chamber will not substitute its sentence for that of a Trial Chamber unless “it believes
                    that the Trial Chamber has committed an error in exercising its discretion, or has failed to follow
                    applicable law.” The test that has to be applied for appeals from sentencing is whether there has been a discernible
                    error in the exercise of the Trial Chamber’s discretion. As long as the Trial Chamber keeps within
                    the proper limits, the Appeals Chamber will not intervene. 

10.     Before considering the arguments of the Appellant on the merits, the
                    Appeals Chamber will, as a preliminary matter, determine whether the Appellant’s submissions meet
                    the formal requirements for consideration on the merits. Should the Appeals Chamber be of the view
                    that an argument does not meet these requirements, then it will be dismissed without detailed
                    reasoning. Further, should a party not argue its points in accordance with the requirements of the Practice
                    Direction on Formal Requirements for Appeals, then the Appeals Chamber may reject a filing or dismiss submissions therein. 

11.     The Appeals Chamber recalls that the formal criteria require an
                    appealing party to provide the Appeals Chamber with exact references to the parts of the records,
                    transcripts, judgements and exhibits to which reference is made. In the Kunarac Appeals Judgement, the Appeals Chamber found that:







[i]n principle, therefore, the Appeals Chamber will dismiss, without providing
                                detailed reasons, those Appellants’ submissions in the briefs or the replies or
                                presented orally during the Appeal Hearing which are evidently unfounded. Objections
                                will be dismissed without detailed reasoning where:









1. the argument of the appellant is clearly irrelevant;









2. it is evident that a reasonable trier of fact could have come to the conclusion
                                challenged by the appellant; or









3. the appellant’s argument unacceptably seeks to substitute his own evaluation of
                                the evidence for that of the Trial Chamber. 



12.     Further, the Appeals Chamber cannot be expected to consider
                    a party’s submissions in detail if they are obscure, contradictory, vague or suffer from other
                    formal and obvious insufficiencies. An allegation of an error of law which has no reasonable prospect of invalidating the decision may
                    be summarily rejected. A
                    party alleging an error of fact must explain what the alleged error is and why it a reasonable trier
                    of fact could not make this finding and in what way it leads to a miscarriage of justice. Where an
                    appellant only challenges the Trial Chamber’s findings and suggests an alternative assessment of the
                    evidence, without indicating in what respects the Trial Chamber’s assessment of the evidence was
                    erroneous, then the appellant will have failed to discharge the burden incumbent upon him. In such
                    circumstances, the Appeals Chamber may dismiss the arguments without a reasoned opinion. The Appeals
                    Chamber will examine below, as a preliminary consideration whether the arguments of the Appellant
                    meet these formal requirements or should be dismissed without detailed reasoning.
B. Preliminary considerations of the arguments

13.     The Appeals Chamber has identified three categories of formal or
                    procedural deficiencies in the

                    Appellant’s submission relating to alleged errors of fact, namely: i) arguments in relation to which
                    the
                    Appeals Chamber cannot identify the alleged error by the Trial Chamber; ii) arguments in relation to
                    which the Appellant fails to make submissions on whether the Trial Chamber’s findings are those that
                    a reasonable trier of fact could have found; and iii) arguments in relation to which the Appellant
                    fails to make submissions as to how the alleged error led to a miscarriage of justice. The Appeals
                    Chamber, therefore, dismisses the following submissions that suffer from the above deficiencies and
                    will not
                    discuss them in detail. The Appeals Chamber will address arguments relating to sentencing in the same manner.

14.     The Appeals Chamber points out that the Appellant was reminded of the
                    criteria for appeal at the appeal hearing and was
                    requested to clarify some of the issues raised in the Defence Appeal Brief and in the Additional
                    Defence Brief. Despite this reminder, the Appellant failed, in some instances, to provide additional explanations.

15.     The Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber did not consider his
                    conduct, while in the detention of the International Tribunal, as a mitigating factor when
                    determining his sentence. This argument was raised for the first time in the Defence Reply. The Appeals Chamber holds that
                    replies should be limited only to arguments rebutting the response arguments and should not include
                    new arguments or amendments of grounds already submitted. This argument will therefore not be
                    considered.
1. Arguments dismissed because no error is identifiable

16.     The Appeals Chamber will not consider those arguments where the
                    Appellant has failed to argue an alleged error and instead merely offers an alternative reading of
                    the evidence. The Appeals Chamber identifies two arguments of this kind in the second ground of
                    appeal: i) The Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding that the fact that he failed to
                    sever his relationship with Milan Lukić after the Drina River incident, despite his knowledge of
                    Milan Lukić’s very serious criminal activity, raised the suspicion of a closer relationship with the
                    paramilitary group; and ii) the Appellant submits that the
                    Trial Chamber misevaluated his evidence and, in particular, the details he provided about the

                    paramilitary group by declining to draw the inference that his behaviour constituted a significant
                    effort to co-operate with the Tribunal. 

17.     In the third ground of appeal, the Appeals Chamber identifies three
                    arguments of this kind: i) the Appellant argues that he testified about the best-man relationship
                    between his family and the Lukić family and that Milan Lukić, following secondary school, went to
                    Switzerland and that the Appellant did not see Lukić until 1992; ii) the Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erroneously concluded in paragraph 51 of the
                    Judgement that the non-Serb civilians started to disappear; and iii) the Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding in paragraph 54 of the Judgement
                    regarding the denial of medical treatment of a severely burned Muslim woman. 

18.    In the sixth ground of appeal, i) the Appellant submits that there was
                    “no chain of command structure” between the Appellant and the Milan Lukić group and, that according
                    to the Appellant the “asserted discriminatory intent of the members of this group cannot be
                    attributed to the accused without further proof to compensate the lack of this chain of command;” and ii) the Appellant takes the view that the Trial Chamber erred in paragraph 256 of the Judgement
                    when it found that the “Accused knew that some evil would befall the Koritnik group when they were
                    being encouraged to stay together in
                    Pionirska Street” and that, in doing so, the Appellant acted with the intent to discriminate on
                    religious or political grounds. 
2. Arguments dismissed because the Appellant fails to submit
                        whether the Trial Chamber’s

                        findings were such that no reasonable trier of fact could have made

19.     The Appeals Chamber will not consider the following arguments because
                    the Appellant fails to make submissions on whether the Trial Chamber’s findings are those that a
                    reasonable trier of fact could not have found or only lists discrepancies between different
                    testimonies without explaining why no reasonable trier of fact could have made the finding. In the
                    second ground of appeal: i) The Appellant contests the Trial Chamber’s finding that the Milan Lukić
                    group in the course of a few weeks committed dozens of crimes, and he submits that, notwithstanding
                    the indictment against Milan Lukić et al., which pleads that the group committed dozens of crimes
                    between May 1992 and October 1994, the first facts that Milan Lukić and his men are charged with
                    relate to the events at the Drina River on 7 June 1992; ii) the Appellant submits that the Trial
                    Chamber’s finding that he knew the other men associated with Milan Lukić is erroneous; iii) the
                    Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the fact that the Appellant knew more about
                    the Milan Lukić group than other witnesses who testified; and iv) the Appellant submits, in
                    connection with the search at the house in Musići, where he admits to have been, that he did not
                    stand guard during the search and was not connected to the disappearance of the money or
                    other valuables. 
3. Arguments dismissed because the Appellant fails to make
                        submissions as to how the alleged error led to a miscarriage of justice

20.     The Appeals Chamber will not consider the following arguments because
                    the Appellant fails to make submissions as to how the alleged error led to a miscarriage of justice.
                    In the third ground of appeal, the Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erroneously found that he
                    had been seen with the Milan Lukić group on “many occasions” before 7 June 1992. He argues that the only evidence relied upon related to the Musići incident and the Drina River
                    incident, and, therefore, the Appellant was only
                    seen together with the Milan Lukić group on one occasion before the Drina River incident. The
                    Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber found that he was seen with these men on several
                    occasions “during the period relevant to the indictment” and that no circularity is involved in the
                    Trial Chamber’s placing reliance on both the Drina River and Musići incidents to reach this finding. The Appellant
                    replies that reference to the period relevant to the indictment must be limited to the period up to
                    and including 7 June 1992, as he was acquitted of further incidents. 

21.     Although the evidence does not appear to establish that the Appellant
                    was seen together with Milan Lukić and his men prior to 7 June 1992 on an occasion other than the
                    Musići incident, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not demonstrated that the alleged
                    error led to a miscarriage of justice. The Appeals Chamber therefore dismisses this ground of
                    appeal.
4. Arguments relating to sentencing dismissed due to failure to
                        argue a discernable error

22.    The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has failed to identify the
                    alleged error in several arguments in the eighth ground of appeal relating to sentencing and
                    therefore dismisses the Appellant’s arguments concerning: i) the Appellant’s diminished mental
                    responsibility; ii) the
                    Appellant’s surrender to the Tribunal; iii) the role of the Appellant in the broader context of the conflict in the
                    former Yugoslavia; and
                    iv) the Appellant’s involvement in the planning of the offences. For the
                    same reasons, the Appeals Chamber dismissed the arguments of the Appellant in the second ground of
                    appeal submitting that the Trial Chamber’s finding that he was associated with the Milan Lukić group
                    indisputably influenced the single sentence imposed. 

23.    The Appeals Chamber has thus dismissed a majority of the Appellant’s
                    arguments on the basis that they were not argued in a way that is required by the Practice
                    Directive, the Rules, the Statute and the case-law of the International Tribunal. In the following
                    Chapters, the Appeals Chamber will
                    consider the merits of the Appellant’s arguments that have been found to meet the formal
                    requirements.
III. ALLEGED FACTUAL ERRORS RELATING TO GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF
                    ARTICLES 3 AND 5 OF THE STATUTE

24.    In his third ground of appeal, the Appellant challenges the Trial
                    Chamber’s findings set out in part III of the Judgement entitled “General Requirements of Article 3
                    and Article 5 of the Statute.” The Appeals Chamber has decided to consider the substance of two of the Appellant’s arguments: (a)
                    the acts of Appellant were not closely related to the armed conflict, and (b) the acts of the
                    Appellant were not part of a widespread or systematic attack of which he had knowledge. Other
                    alleged factual errors have already been dismissed by the Appeals Chamber for reasons set out above
                    in Chapter II.
A. Alleged error in finding that the acts of the Appellant were
                        closely related to the armed conflict

25.    The Appellant argues that, although he agrees that there was an armed
                    conflict in the municipality of Višegrad at all times relevant to the Indictment, his acts were not
                    closely related to it. The Appellant argues that he was not an informant to the Milan Lukić group
                    and challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding in paragraph 57 of the Judgement that he was closely
                    associated with the group and acted in furtherance of the conflict or under the guise of the armed
                    conflict. The Prosecution responds that the
                    Appellant has not shown how the Trial Chamber’s finding as to the nexus between his acts and the
                    armed conflict was unreasonable. 

26.     Paragraph 57 of the Judgement states that:







the acts of the Accused were closely related to the armed conflict. Although he did
                                not take part in any fighting, the Accused was closely associated with Serb
                                paramilitaries, his acts were all committed in furtherance of the armed conflict, and he
                                acted under the guise of the armed conflict.



27.     The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not demonstrated that
                    no reasonable trier of fact could have made this finding. The question whether the Appellant acted
                    as an informant to the group or the exact nature of his relationship with the members of the group
                    is not the determining factor in establishing whether the acts of the Appellant were closely related
                    to the armed conflict. The Appellant does not dispute that the acts of the Milan Lukić group were
                    connected to the conflict. In fact, the acts for which the Appellant has been convicted were carried
                    out while he was together with the Milan Lukić group. The Appeals Chamber is of the view that the
                    Appellant was associated with the Milan Lukić group on that occasion and that this establishes a
                    sufficient nexus between the Appellant’s acts and the armed conflict. This sub-ground of appeal
                    therefore fails.
B. Alleged error in finding that the acts of the Appellant were
                        part of a widespread or systematic attack of which he had knowledge

28.     The Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erroneously concluded that
                    the acts of the Appellant formed part of a widespread and systematic attack and that he knew of the
                    attack. The Appellant submits that he did not
                    know of the attack and that the Trial Chamber’s finding is not supported by the evidence. 

29.     The Prosecution responds that “[t]he Trial Chamber’s finding was not
                    that Milan Lukić was the person who told the Appellant about the commission of his crimes, but
                    rather that the Appellant was told that crimes had been committed by Lukić.” 

30.     It must be stressed that the Trial Chamber’s finding relevant to the
                    present ground relates to the Appellant’s knowledge of on-going attacks against the Muslim civilian
                    population in the region of Višegrad. The Appeals Chamber finds that, although the Trial Chamber
                    does not refer in the relevant footnote to the Appellant’s knowledge, it is obvious from the various
                    findings of the Trial Chamber elsewhere in the Judgement that the Appellant participated with Milan
                    Lukić and others in the searching
                    of the house of witness VG-59’s father in Musići, and that he was present at the Vilina Vlas Hotel on
                    7 June 1992 when the seven Muslim men arrived escorted by Milan Lukić and his men. Further, the Trial Chamber found that “in view of the sheer scale and systematic nature of the
                    attack, the Accused must have noticed the consequences of this campaign upon the non-Serb civilian
                    population of the Višegrad municipality.” The
                    Appeals Chamber is of the view that a reasonable Trial Chamber could conclude from the above that
                    the Appellant knew about the on-going attack against the Muslim civilian population in Višegrad.
                    This sub-ground of appeal therefore fails.
C. Summary of findings

31.     The Appeals Chamber dismisses the Appellant’s arguments relating to the
                    general requirements of Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute.
IV. ALLEGED FACTUAL ERRORS RELATING TO THE DRINA RIVER INCIDENT AND
                    THE APPELLANT’S RELATIONSHIP WITH THE MILAN LUKIĆ PARAMILITARY GROUP

32.     The Appellant’s arguments alleging errors of fact are spread throughout
                    his submissions and frequently repeated in several grounds of appeal. The Appeals Chamber has
                    therefore chosen to deal first with the alleged errors of fact relating to the Drina River incident
                    and the Appellant’s relationship with the Milan Lukić para-military group. These arguments are
                    mainly set out in the Appellant’s first and second grounds of appeal. The Appellant argues: i) that
                    he was not armed on the day of the Drina River incident; ii) that he was not aware of the homicidal
                    intent of Milan Lukić and his men before they took the seven Muslim men to the bank of the Drina
                    River; iii) that he attempted unsuccessfully to dissuade Milan Lukić from carrying out the act; iv)
                    that he remained at a distance from the armed men when the shooting was taking place; v) that he was
                    not an informant to the group; and
                    vi) that he did
                    not take part in searching the house belonging to witness VG-59’s father in Musići. 
A. Alleged error in finding that the Appellant was armed on 7
                        June 1992

33.    The Appellant argues that he was not armed on 7 June 1992. He submits
                    that there are contradictions in the testimony of witnesses VG-14 and VG-32, regarding whether he
                    was carrying an automatic rifle on 7 June 1992. He argues that the contradictions are such that they undermine the credibility of the two witnesses
                    and thereby the Trial Chamber’s finding that he was armed. 

34.     The Appellant notes that witness VG-32 stated that, upon entering the
                    Vilina Vlas Hotel, he noticed the Appellant standing a few metres away with his arms folded and
                    without a weapon. Witness VG-32 only noticed that the Appellant was carrying a Kalashnikov when he came over to the
                    vehicle close to where the witness was. The Appellant observes that, on the contrary, witness VG-14 stated that the Appellant was carrying
                    an automatic rifle when he was standing in the very place at the hotel entrance described by witness
                    VG-32. The Appellant maintains that it is not possible for witness VG-
                    32 to have erred when he described having seen the Appellant at the entrance with his arms crossed
                    and without a weapon. In this regard, the Appellant argues that the fact that witness VG-32 was able
                    to
                    describe in detail what he was wearing at the time indicates that, had he been armed, the witness
                    would have noticed it. He submits
                    moreover that the two witnesses asserted that, in the brief interval when Milan Lukić was speaking
                    with Šušnjar and looking for the keys to the room, the Appellant did not leave the area or speak
                    with anyone before going to the cars. In this regard the Appellant states that witness VG-32 did not
                    mention a weapon in his interviews with the Bosnia and Herzegovina police and the investigators. The
                    Appellant considers that the only possible conclusion is that witness VG-32 invented the fact that
                    the Appellant was carrying a weapon when he went to the vehicle, for the sole purpose of
                    incriminating him. The Prosecution contends that the testimony of witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 show that the Appellant was
                    armed when he left the hotel and that the Appellant does not demonstrate how it was unreasonable for
                    the Trial Chamber to have made this finding. 

35.      The Appellant further submits that the testimony of witness VG-14
                    concerning the weapon is unreliable since, although witness VG-14 claimed to be familiar with the
                    type of weapon in question from his military service, he told the investigators of the Prosecution
                    that it was a semi-automatic weapon and then stated at trial that it was an automatic weapon. The
                    Appellant submits that the witness would only have made such an error if he had invented the fact. The Prosecution responds that, even if it had been established that witness VG-14’s previous
                    statement contradicted his testimony on the type of weapon in question, this would not make it
                    unreasonable to accept the testimony of this witness when establishing whether or not the Appellant
                    was armed when he left the hotel. 

36.     Based on the testimony of witnesses VG-14 and VG-32, the Trial
                    Chamber







reject[ed] the Accused’s evidence that he was unarmed at the hotel. The Trial Chamber
                                is satisfied that, when the Accused left the Vilina Vlas Hotel with Milan Lukić, the two
                                unidentified armed men, and the seven Muslim men, he was in possession of an automatic
                                weapon, which he carried to the Drina River. VG-32 gave evidence that he first saw the
                                Accused carrying a weapon when he left the Vilina Vlas Hotel, and VG-14 gave evidence
                                that he saw the Accused with an automatic rifle inside the lobby of the hotel. When
                                giving evidence in Court, both witnesses identified the weapon of the Accused as an
                                automatic rifle. 



It should also be noted that the Trial Chamber specified that witness VG-14 declared having seen the
                    Appellant with an automatic rifle inside the lobby of the hotel while witness VG-32, although he did
                    not see him with a weapon before they left the hotel, did not suggest that he did not have one
                    previously. All he said was that he had not seen him with a weapon inside the hotel. 

37.    The Appeals Chamber finds that the arguments presented by the Appellant
                    do not establish that no reasonable tribunal could have found, based on the testimony of witnesses
                    VG-14 and VG-32, that the Appellant was carrying an automatic rifle when he left the Vilina Vlas
                    Hotel. Both witnesses described the Appellant when he was in the lobby of the Vilina Vlas Hotel.
                    Witness VG-32 testified that the Appellant was unarmed in the hotel lobby: “[h]is arms were crossed,
                    and he was leaning against this little desk,” four or five metres from the reception area where the
                    witness was, which was unlit save for
                    the natural light coming from the entrance. However, witness VG-14 described the Appellant “in the
                    hotel lobby” with an automatic rifle. Given the configuration of the place and given that the respective testimony does not show that the two witnesses looked at the Appellant
                    at exactly the same time, the two testimonies cannot be considered to be incompatible when
                    determining whether the Appellant was carrying a weapon in the hotel lobby at any one moment. In any
                    event, as stated by the Trial Chamber, both witnesses confirmed having seen the Appellant with a
                    weapon when he went to the vehicle after leaving the hotel. The alleged contradiction as to the type
                    of weapon described by witness VG-14 in his successive statements is not such that no reasonable
                    trier of fact could have found that the Appellant was armed with an automatic weapon when he left
                    the hotel.

38.     The Appellant further relies on the testimony of witnesses Petar
                    Mitrović, Ilija Zečević, Živorad Savić, Miloje Novaković, Radomir Vasiljević, Ratomir Šimšić, VG-13,
                    VGD-22, VGD-24 and VG-87 to support his argument that after handing in his gun to the Territorial
                    Defence (TO) command in Višegrad and being placed in detention in late May or around 1 June 1992 he
                    no longer had a weapon. The Appellant states that when he left prison in early June he was assigned
                    to “town cleaning” which he carried out until 14 June 1992 when he fell off a horse and was taken to
                    hospital. During the Appeals hearing, the Appellant admitted that the Prosecution is correct when stating that
                    it was possible that he was armed on 7 June 1992 but that it was close to impossible since he had
                    given his weapon back to the
                    TO before he was sent to prison. 

39.     The Appeals Chamber finds that this argument is unfounded because the
                    fact that the Appellant returned his weapon before being arrested and was seen unarmed by various
                    witnesses in the months of May and June 1992 does not call into question the testimony of witnesses
                    VG-14 and VG-32 that he was

                    armed when he left the Vilina Vlas Hotel on 7 June 1992. The Appellant could have obtained another
                    weapon after handing in his own.

40.     The Appellant draws attention to other contradictions, some of which, he
                    accepts, are more significant than others, in support of his assertion that the testimony of
                    witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 is generally not reliable. The Prosecution argues that a Trial Chamber could find all or some of a testimony to be reliable,
                    even if discrepancies exist between that testimony and other statements, and the Appellant does not,
                    in this case, demonstrate that the Trial Chamber’s findings based on the testimony are unreasonable. During the hearing,
                    the Appellant contended that these minor discrepancies point to the witnesses’ inability to remember
                    the events in exact detail and the possibility that they may have been wrong about more important
                    facts such as whether he had a weapon or not. Having
                    considered the above alleged contradictions, the Appeals Chamber holds that they are too minor or
                    relate to details of the event which are irrelevant in supporting the Appellant's submission that
                    the Trial Chamber erred in relying on the testimony of witnesses VG-14 and VG-32.

41.     The Appeals Chamber has held above that the Trial Chamber’s finding that
                    the Appellant was armed at the Vilina Vlas Hotel was reasonable. The following considerations focus
                    on the Trial Chamber’s findings that, after having left the Vilina Vlas Hotel, i) the Appellant was
                    armed when he and the Milan Lukić group parked in Sase and walked down to the Drina River, and ii)
                    that he pointed his gun at the seven men and prevented them from fleeing.

42.     The Appellant submits that he was not carrying a weapon when the seven
                    Muslim men were escorted down to the Drina River. He further argues that witnesses VG-14 and VG-32
                    gave different testimonies as to whether the Appellant pointed a weapon at them and prevented their
                    escape. 

43.     The Trial Chamber found that







Milan Lukić, the Accused and the other two unidentified men pointed their guns,
                                which had their safety catches off, at the Muslim men, as they walked towards the bank
                                of the Drina River. 



44.     The Appeals Chamber notes that, contrary to witness VG-32, witness VG-14
                    was not asked any questions and did not testify as to whether the Appellant and the other three men
                    pointed their guns at them (the seven Muslim men) during the time they were escorted from the place
                    in Sase where the cars were parked until they were lined up in front of the Drina River. As to
                    witness VG-32, he testified that the behavior of the soldiers changed drastically when they got out
                    of the car, and he was then asked to describe in what way it changed. Witness VG-32 indicated that
                    when they got out of the car the soldiers stepped back and had their weapons on the ready. Witness
                    VG-32 then testified that:







Q. I want to ask you -- you said they had their weapons "on the ready." What exactly do
                                you mean by that?A. I mean that the weapons were pointed at us, and of course the rifles had their
                                safeties off.Q. I want to ask you specifically about Mitar Vasiljević. Did he have his rifle or did
                                he still have a weapon at this time?A. Yes.Q. And did he too have his weapon pointed at the detained men? A. Yes. 



45.     The Appeals Chamber holds that the Appellant has failed to show that no
                    reasonable Trial Chamber could have made the findings that the Appellant was armed at the Vilina
                    Vlas Hotel, and that he pointed his gun at the seven Muslim men and prevented them from fleeing at
                    the Drina River. This sub-ground of appeal is therefore dismissed.
"B. Alleged error regarding the moment from which the Appellant
                        had knowledge that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed and not exchanged

46.     The Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the
                    Appellant knew that Milan Lukić and his para-military group committed serious crimes before 7 June
                    1992. The Appellant asserts that there was no way for him to determine Milan Lukić’s homicidal
                    intent vis-à-vis the group of seven Muslim men before they stopped at Sase and started walking
                    towards the Drina River. The
                    Appellant maintains that he became aware of Milan Lukić’s intent at the same time as the seven
                    Muslim men. He points out that he was neither a member of the Milan Lukić group nor did he take part in the
                    arrest of the seven Muslim men or in their transfer to the Vilina Vlas Hotel. He further submits
                    that he was unarmed and happened to be present in the Vilina Vlas Hotel, when the Milan Lukić group
                    arrived. He adds that
                    the testimony of witness VG-32 shows that it is because Milan Lukić could not find the keys to the
                    hotel
                    room in which he had intended to lock up the seven Muslim men, that he decided to bring them to the
                    cars and leave the Viliana Vlas Hotel with them. 

47.     The Prosecution submits that the Appellant does not establish how the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding is unreasonable, in view of all the evidence relied on in concluding that
                    the Appellant knew when he left the Vilina Vlas Hotel that the men were not to be exchanged but
                    killed. 

48.     The relevant findings of the Trial Chamber are as follows:







[t]he Trial Chamber is satisfied that, when the Accused left the Vilina Vlas Hotel, he
                                knew that the men were not to be exchanged but were to be killed. The evidence of the
                                Accused himself was that he knew that Milan Lukić had committed serious crimes,
                                including killings, in the area of Višegrad shortly prior to the Drina River incident.
                                On the afternoon of 7 June 1992, during the drive from Višegrad to the Vilina Vlas
                                Hotel, he had been told by the man who had driven him there that Milan Lukić had, on
                                several occasions, taken out Muslim employees from the Varda Factory in order to
                                mistreat or kill them. The Trial Chamber rejects the Accused’s evidence that it was only
                                when Milan Lukić stopped the cars near Sase and ordered the seven men to walk towards
                                the bank of the Drina River that he understood that these men were not to be exchanged,
                                but that they were to be killed. 



49.     As to the specific finding emphasised above, the Appellant submits under
                    his third ground of appeal that he had no knowledge of Milan Lukić having committed murders prior to the Drina River incident.
                    He argues that the incident of the Varda factory at which people were allegedly killed could not
                    have been the subject of the conversation he had with Stanko Pecikoza on 7 June 1992 because the
                    events in question took place three days later, on 10 June 1992. The Appeals Chamber finds that the
                    above argument is consistent with the wording of Counts 8 and 9 of the Indictment, charging Milan
                    Lukić for the Varda factory events, which reads as follows:







[o]n or about 10 June 1992 , Milan Lukić and another uncharged individual drove to the
                                Varda sawmill and furniture factory in Višegrad, entered the factory and forced seven
                                Bosnian Muslim men to go to the bank of the river by the factory. Milan Lukić then shot
                                them repeatedly with an automatic weapon thereby causing the death of: Nusret Aljošević,
                                Ned`ad Bektaš, Mušan Čančar, Ibrišim Memišević, Hamed Osmanagić, Lutvo Tvrtković and
                                Sabahudin Velagić.



During the Appeals hearing the Presiding Judge invited the Prosecution to elaborate on the apparent
                    contradiction existing between the Judgement and the amended indictment as to the date of the Varda
                    factory incidents. The Prosecution responded by
                    referring to the cross-examination of the Appellant by Counsel for the Prosecutor (Mr. Groome) at
                    trial on this point at page 2105 of the transcripts. The Prosecution stressed that, after having
                    been asked about incidents at the Varda factory as well as at Stanko Pecikoza’s factory, the Appellant was asked whether Stanko told him what Milan Lukić was
                    doing with the men he took from these various places and that he answered “killing them, I don’t
                    know.
                    I think they found the body of that young man Velagić, somewhere in the vicinity of the village.” The Prosecution submits that the fact that Milan Lukić was charged with this incident on 10 June
                    1992 should not be taken to mean that there were not other occasions when Milan Lukić took out men
                    from the Varda factory and indeed other factories in Višegrad. According to the Prosecution, the
                    Trial Chamber was more than reasonable in finding, on the basis of the Appellant’s testimony of what
                    Stanko Pecikoza had told him, that people were being taken out and mistreated, and that he knew that
                    they were being killed. 

50.     The Appeals Chamber notes that the Trial Chamber expressly referred in
                    footnote 245 of the Judgement to the testimony of the Appellant during trial and to his previous
                    statement given to investigators as the sources for reaching its conclusion. Reviewing the relevant
                    excerpts of the evidence, it appears that the testimony of the Appellant is unclear as to what he
                    was told by Stanko Pecikoza on 7
                    June 1992 on their way to the Vilina Vlas Hotel.

51.     The Appeals Chamber notes, first, that some confusion arose as to the
                    ownership of the Varda factory. As a result of this confusion, when the Appellant refers in his
                    statement to the fact that Milan Lukić mistreated Stanko Pecikoza’s employees, it is unclear whether
                    the Appellant actually refers to incidents at the Varda factory or to other incidents. The
                    Prosecution seemed to be unclear at trial about this issue and the Appeals Chamber considers, contrary to the Prosecution statement at trial that it was not
                    “important to the case,” that this issue requires clarification. The Appeals Chamber recalls that
                    the Appellant testified that Stanko Pecikoza had a private business, namely, a sawmill and a
                    carpentry shop. The Appeals Chamber notes that when
                    asked by the Prosecution during his cross-examination about the name of this business and whether it
                    was not “Varda” or “Partizan,” the Appellant answered in the negative and explained that the two
                    enterprises in question where socially owned, while Stanko Pecikoza’s sawmill and carpentry shop was
                    a private business. This was confirmed by the Appellant
                    during the hearing of the appeal. 

52.    Second, the Appeals Chamber notes that further confusion arose from the
                    fact that, despite the Prosecution efforts to focus on what the Appellant was told by Stanko
                    Pecikoza on 7 June 1992, the Appellant answered in a manner that leaves doubts as to the extent of
                    his testimony (see first excerpt below from the Appellant’s statement to the investigators on 16
                    November 2000 - exhibit 15.1), or even clearly includes information regarding events that occurred
                    after 7 June 1992 according to the Appellant himself or according to the indictment (see third
                    excerpt below from the Appellant’s testimony at trial):







Groome : Did Stanko at that time ever tell you that he thought that Milan was taking men
                                from his factory and killing them ?Vasiljević : I think they were taken from the Varda factory. I think that he also came
                                to his house and that he was mistreating some Muslims over there.Groome : And Stanko told you this while he you [sic] spoke with him on the road?
                                Vasiljević : Yes.Groome : He actually told you that people had been killed by Milan Lukić? Vasiljević :
                                You mean did he mention their names?Groome : Not the men that were killed but that Milan Lukić was killing the men?Vasiljević : Yes, that he was causing problems, that he didn’t know what to do with
                                    him .



In spite of the use of the word “yes” by the Appellant, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that this
                    excerpt does not allow for a conclusion that the Appellant was told by Stanko Pecikoza about the
                    killings allegedly committed by Milan Lukić, since his statement, seen in context, was followed by
                    the expression “that he was causing problems.” Therefore, his prior statement (exhibit 15.1) does
                    not support a finding in relation to killings. The corresponding section of the testimony of the
                    Appellant on
                    26 October 2001 during trial is as follows:







Q: Did he [Stanko] tell you that Milan Lukić was coming to his factory, taking men away
                                and killing them?A: Not that he was killing them but that he also went to his home, to his place, and
                                    that he also harassed his employees, Muslims .



The Appellant’s testimony does not allow for a conclusion as to killings. The Appeals Chamber finds,
                    however, that the conclusion made by the Trial Chamber as to mistreatment is reasonable on the basis
                    of the above-mentioned excerpts. The Appeals Chamber notes that the Prosecution tried to obtain a
                    more precise answer from the Appellant as to information related to killings, and that having
                    reminded him of his ambiguous prior answer, it added:







Q: My question is did Stanko tell you whether or not Milan Lukić was killing members of
                                his staff from his factory?A: Workers from the Varda factory, I don’t think he -- he didn’t kill any of his
                                employees. I just think that at one point in time he took them away while Stanko was in
                                town. But luckily for those people, because they were about to be taken away -- or they
                                were already taken away, but he sent his son and his brother and they managed to catch
                                up with the vehicle transporting them somewhere near Banja, and they took them off of
                                the vehicle, his son and his brother did. So again, they were lucky that he was on time.
                                But that happened only later, after the 7th. 



Having reviewed the transcripts, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that the only part of the
                    Appellant’s testimony that positively refers to killing is the following:







Q: Did Stanko also tell you that Milan Lukić was taking men from the Partizan factory as
                                well as other places?A: Yes, yes. And I think that he was particularly angry because of a neighbour of his
                                […] by the surname of Velagić.Q: […] did he tell you what Milan Lukić was doing with these men that he took from
                                    these various places?A: Killing them. I don’t know. I think they found the body of that young man,
                                    Velagić, somewhere in the vicinity of the village .



The testimony of the Appellant is ambiguous given the use of the expression “I don’t know”. It is
                    unclear whether the Appellant was told about the discovery of the body of the young man Velagić by
                    Stanko Pecikoza in the car on the way to the hotel, or whether Stanko Pecikoza only expressed his
                    suspicion that Milan Lukić had killed Velagić. Furthermore, it must be noted that a certain Velagić
                    was, according to paragraph 15 of the Indictment, killed on 10 June by Milan Lukić at the Varda
                    factory. This fact renders the testimony of the Appellant even more unclear as to which killings he
                    was referring to.

53.     For the above-mentioned reasons, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that
                    the evidence in question does not support the Trial Chamber’s finding that Stanko Pecikoza told the
                    Appellant about any killings of workers from the Varda factory that would have taken place before 7
                    June 1992. Even if it were admitted that the Appellant had been told by Stanko Pecikoza that the
                    young man Velagić had been killed by Milan Lukić, this would still be insufficient to safely infer
                    that the Appellant knew when he left the hotel that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed and
                    not exchanged. Therefore, the Appeals Chamber finds that no reasonable trier of fact could have made
                    this finding, on the basis of the evidence. In this respect, the Appeals Chambers also takes into
                    consideration the following elements: i) the Appellant’s actions at the hotel as described by the
                    witnesses, including the fact that he had a weapon, do not by themselves reveal anything as to his
                    knowledge about the homicidal intent of Milan Lukić; ii) the version given by the Appellant that
                    Milan Lukić pretended at the time that the men were to be exchanged is consistent with the fact that
                    witness VG-32 testified that, while in the car on the way to Sase, he was told about the exchange by
                    one of the soldiers; iii) witness VG-32 testified that it was from the moment
                    Milan Lukić ordered them to leave the car that the behaviour of the soldiers changed drastically; iv) the

                    Appellant’s testimony as to the fact that no violence was committed by Milan Lukić and his men
                    during the search at witness VG-59’s father’s house in Musići is supported by the testimonies of
                    witnesses VG-
                    55; and VG-59; and v) lack of clear evidence that the Appellant knew prior to 7 June 1992 about
                    killings committed by Milan Lukić.

54.     The Appeals Chamber will consider whether this error led to a
                    miscarriage of justice in the context of the alleged error relating to the Appellant’s mens rea to
                    kill the seven men (see discussion paragraphs 128-132 below).
C. Alleged error in finding that the Appellant pointed a gun at
                        the seven

                        Muslim men while at the Vilina Vlas Hotel

55.     The Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that he was
                    armed at the hotel and that he pointed his gun at the seven Muslim men. He submits that the evidence relied on by the Trial Chamber (witnesses VG-14 and VG-32) does not
                    support such a finding. 

56.     The Prosecution submits that witness VG-14 testified that the Appellant
                    had a gun, did not testify that the Appellant actually pointed it at the victims inside the hotel,
                    and that witness VG-32 testified that it was one of the unidentified perpetrators, not the
                    Appellant, who was pointing a rifle at the victims in the hotel. The Prosecution further submits that it was open to a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the
                    Appellant was present at the hotel with a rifle contributing to preventing the victims from fleeing
                    the hotel.

57.     The issue of whether the Appellant was armed has been dealt with above
                    and the Appeals Chamber concluded that it was reasonable of the Trial Chamber to find that the
                    Appellant was armed at the Vilina Vlas Hotel. Therefore, the issue to be considered at this stage is limited to whether it was reasonable of the
                    Trial Chamber to find that the Appellant pointed his gun at the seven Muslim men at the hotel in
                    paragraph 209 of the Judgement. This conclusion is not supported by the Trial Chamber’s
                    own finding in paragraph 100 of the Judgement where it found that “[o]ne of the unidentified armed
                    men guarded them [the seven Muslim men], pointing his automatic rifle at them, preventing any of
                    them from leaving the lobby of the hotel.” Further, the evidence presented at trial does not
                    support, as admitted by the Prosecution, a finding that the Appellant pointed his gun at the seven
                    Muslim men. The Appeals Chamber considers that no reasonable trier of fact could have found that the
                    Appellant pointed a gun at
                    the seven Muslim men at this stage. However, this finding was only one of several relating to the

                    actions of the Appellant from which the Trial Chamber inferred that the Appellant shared the intent
                    to
                    kill. It is therefore in the context of the alleged error relating to the mens rea of the Appellant
                    to kill the seven Muslim men that the Appeals Chamber will determine whether the error made by the
                    Trial Chamber, when it found that the Appellant pointed a gun at the men in the hotel, led to a
                    miscarriage of justice. 
D. Alleged error in dismissing the Appellant’s argument that he
                        attempted to dissuade Milan Lukić from killing

58.     The Appellant challenges the fact that the Trial Chamber dismissed his
                    assertion that he attempted to dissuade Milan Lukić from killing the Muslim men, arguing that this
                    was not confirmed by witnesses VG-14 and VG-32, who were, in any event of the view that no one could
                    have influenced Milan Lukić. On this point, the Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber, in paragraph 107 of the Judgement,
                    expressly rejected the Appellant’s submission that he could not have dissuaded Milan Lukić from
                    pursuing his criminal purpose. The Prosecution considers that this is an irrelevant question since
                    the Trial Chamber found the Appellant shared the criminal purpose. 

59.     The Trial Chamber’s findings on this point are as follows:







[t]he Trial Chamber rejects as wholly untrue the evidence of the Accused that he tried
                                to persuade Milan Lukić to spare the life of Meho Džafić or any other man in that group.
                                The Trial Chamber accepts the evidence of VG-32 that the Accused said nothing in
                                response to the pleas of Meho Džafić as the men were marched towards the bank of the
                                Drina River. [t]he Trial Chamber also rejects the evidence of the Accused that, in any event, he was
                                powerless to stop Milan Lukić from killing the Muslim men. VG-32 and VG-14 gave evidence
                                of their impression that throughout the entire incident there was no one around Milan
                                Lukić who could have affected him or his decisions and orders in a meaningful way.
                                However, the Accused’s claim of duress is inconsistent with the evidence that, one week
                                prior to the shooting at the Drina River and during the Musići incident, he had
                                successfully pleaded with Milan Lukić not to mistreat and harass the people in that
                                house. He asserted that he was the only person who could help on that occasion, and that
                                he had prevented the people living in that house from being mistreated and harassed by
                                Milan Lukić. The Trial Chamber has already rejected that claim, but the inconsistent
                                claims by the Accused as to his relationship with Milan Lukić has persuaded the Trial
                                Chamber that the Accused is prepared to give false versions of that relationship
                                according to the benefit he seeks to obtain at the time each version is given.There
                                    was no other acceptable evidence that the Accused was under duress vis-à-vis Milan
                                    Lukić. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused willingly accompanied Milan
                                    Lukić and his group with the seven Muslim men to the Drina River .



60.    The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not demonstrated how the
                    Trial Chamber’s rejection of his assertion that he had attempted to dissuade Milan Lukić from
                    carrying out the killings
                    was unreasonable. The Appellant has also failed to demonstrate how the fact that none of the persons

                    present could have influenced Milan Lukić would be relevant to the assessment as to whether or not
                    the Appellant attempted to dissuade Milan Lukić. The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has
                    failed to show that no reasonable tribunal could have made this finding. This sub-ground of appeal
                    therefore fails.
E. Alleged error in dismissing the argument that the Appellant
                        remained at a distance from the scene of the crime

61.     The Appellant considers that it must be inferred that he did not share
                    the homicidal intent of Milan Lukić and his group since he remained at a distance from them as soon
                    as that intent became clear to him. The Appellant maintains that his submission that he did not approach the scene of the crime, but
                    kept his distance amongst the trees, is corroborated by the testimony of witness VG-79 who observed
                    the scene through binoculars from the other bank of the Drina River. The Appellant emphasises that
                    when he gave his statement to the Prosecution’s investigators on 16 and 17 November 2000, in which
                    he claimed that he remained at a distance from the others, he could not have known that witness
                    VG-79 had observed the event.

62.     The Appellant submits that, witness VG-79 testified that he “also saw
                    […] seven not armed men in civilian clothes and three or four armed men. They approached the river
                    and those seven men were gathered near the bank. He also recognised the two of his friends and the
                    three other people who were standing behind them before they started shooting them.” The Appellant adds that when the Defence requested witness VG-79 to confirm his written statement
                    during the cross-examination, regarding the presence of seven unarmed and three armed men, the
                    witness replied: “Yes, seven and three, but the fourth individual, he was near a tree and we
                    couldn’t see properly from that angle, and I say that it – now that it was 10 or 11, probably 10 or
                    11 people, because on the left-hand side he was probably partly covered by the tree, as you go
                    towards the Drina River.” The Appellant submits that the
                    witness then confirmed not having mentioned the fourth man because the Appellant was partially
                    obscured by the tree and the witness could not see him clearly. The Appellant notes, furthermore,
                    that the fact that witness VG-79 was in a position to notice that one of the members of the group
                    had very light-coloured hair demonstrates that he could see the scene very clearly.1 

63.     The Appellant submits that, had he been one of the three armed men,
                    witness VG-79, who knew him, would have recognised him. He maintains, moreover, that the argument that he was at a distance from the other three men is
                    supported by witness VG-79’s testimony on the colour of the uniforms of the various protagonists. The Appellant states that witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 thought they were going to die, had lost close
                    relations in the Drina River incident, and saw in the Appellant the only person who might pay for
                    those crimes. By contrast, witness VG-79 was not in such a difficult situation from a psychological point of view
                    and this makes his statement more objective.

64.     The Prosecution understands that the Appellant is thus seeking to
                    confirm his argument at trial that, having realised that he would not succeed in persuading Milan
                    Lukić to spare the victims, he stopped 10 or 15 metres from the Drina River. The Prosecution
                    responds that witness VG-79 did not testify to this effect. The Prosecution adds that the Trial
                    Chamber did not discount the testimony of witness VG-79 and, on the contrary, considered it to be
                    compatible with its findings. It further states that the Appellant does not demonstrate how any
                    aspect of the Trial Chamber’s findings relating to witness VG-79 is unreasonable.1 

65.     The relevant findings of the Trial Chamber on this point are as
                    follows:







The Trial Chamber is satisfied that Milan Lukić, the Accused and the other two
                                unidentified men pointed their guns, which had their safety catches off, at the Muslim
                                men, as they walked towards the bank of the Drina River.The Trial Chamber is
                                    satisfied that the Accused followed the men to the banks of the Drina River, and it
                                    rejects as untruthful the Accused’s evidence that, when he realised that he could
                                    not persuade Milan Lukić to spare the men, he turned away from the group and stopped
                                    some
                                    10 to 15 metres away from the river. 



66.    The Appeals Chamber first notes that the testimony of witness VG-79 does
                    not confirm the Appellant’s submission that he was unarmed. Witness VG-79 described the scene as
                    observed by him from the other bank of the Drina River and stated: “[i]n front, there were about
                    seven people, and behind there were three and sometimes four, I guess, as they were going towards
                    the Drina.” He confirmed that a tree prevented him
                    from seeing the fourth person properly. It should also be noted that, in his
                    sketch, the witness placed three circles representing three men behind seven circles representing the

                    seven Muslims. The Trial Chamber clearly indicated that it was not satisfied that the Appellant had
                    opened fire at the same time as the three men who were with him. With regard to assessing whether the Appellant should be viewed as a co-perpetrator in the joint
                    criminal enterprise to kill the seven Muslim men the Trial Chamber considered that







the Accused personally participated in this joint criminal enterprise by preventing the
                                seven Muslim men from fleeing by pointing a gun at them while they were detained at the
                                Vilina Vlas Hotel, by escorting them to the bank of the Drina River and pointing a gun
                                at them to prevent their escape, and by standing behind the Muslim men with his gun
                                together with the other three offenders shortly before the shooting started. 



67.     The Trial Chamber considered it to be established beyond reasonable
                    doubt that the Appellant had escorted the seven Muslim men to the bank of the Drina River, and had a
                    gun aimed at them to prevent them from fleeing. The Appeals Chamber finds that, even if the
                    testimony of witness VG-79 effectively confirms the Appellant’s version that he was several metres
                    away from Milan Lukić and the two other armed menduring the shooting,the Appellant has not
                    established that the Trial Chamber erred when it found that he was behind the seven Muslim men with
                    his weapon, together with the three other perpetrators,shortly before the shooting.Additionally, in the view of the Appeals Chamber, assuming that the Trial Chamber erred in
                    concluding as it did, the Appellant has not demonstrated that this error would have had an impact on
                    the inference made by the Trial Chamber as to the Appellant’s intent. In other words, the Appellant
                    has not established that the error in question would lead to a miscarriage of justice. Furthermore,
                    the Trial Chamber found that it had not been established beyond reasonable doubt that the Appellant
                    fired his weapon at the same time as the other three or that he personally killed anyone
                    or more of the victims. It is therefore not
                    necessary to go into the question of where exactly the

                    Appellant stood during the shooting. The Appeals Chamber cannot find any error committed by the
                    Trial Chamber in its treatment of the testimony of witness VG-79 or its assessment of the evidence
                    presented at trial. This sub-ground of appeal is rejected.
F. Alleged error in finding that the Appellant was an informant
                        to the

                        Milan Lukić group

68.     The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber committed a factual error
                    in paragraph 75 of the Judgement when it held that, although he was not a member of Milan Lukić’s
                    paramilitary group, he did have some association with the group and, in particular, acted as an
                    informant to it. He maintains that the finding that he had given information to the group with the full realisation
                    that it would be used to
                    persecute Muslims was especially unreasonable. In support of this complaint, the Appellant argues not only that the Trial Chamber failed to state
                    the basis for its conclusion but also that there was no evidence on the basis of which it could have
                    reached that conclusion beyond all reasonable doubt. He emphasises that the only evidence on which
                    the Trial Chamber relied in reaching this conclusion was the evidence of witness VG-14 who testified
                    that, in Sase, the Appellant had replied to Milan Lukić that the house near which they had stopped
                    belonged to Muslims. The Appellant
                    contends that even if this was true, which he disputes, it could not form a sufficient basis for the Trial Chamber’s finding that he acted as an informant
                    to the group and knew that the information he supplied would be used to persecute Muslims. He adds
                    that the Trial Chamber accepted that the group included Serbs from Višegrad, that
                    Milan Lukić himself was from the town and that the group therefore had no need of external
                    informants. He concludes by
                    pointing out that he knew that witness VG-59 and his brother were reserve police officers but that
                    he said nothing about this to Milan Lukić, thereby proving that he did not act as his informant. 

69.     The Prosecution responds that the Appellant’s piecemeal approach of
                    attacking each finding of the Trial Chamber one by one leads to his failure to appreciate “as a
                    whole” the findings regarding his relationship with Milan Lukić’s group. The Prosecution states that
                    paragraph 75 of the Judgement is a “summary” of the Trial Chamber’s lengthy and sophisticated
                    analysis of a large amount of evidence which led it to make careful findings as to the association
                    in question. The
                    Prosecution submits that the Appellant fails to show how it was unreasonable for the Trial Chamber
                    to make the findings it did, given the Appellant’s detailed knowledge of the group and its
                    activities as revealed by his testimony, the evidence regarding his close (kum) relationship with Milan Lukić, the evidence regarding his participation in the search of the house
                    of witness VG-59’s father in Musići and the evidence of witness VG-14 regarding the fact that the Appellant informed Milan Lukić that
                    the person who owned the house in front of which the vehicle had stopped in Sase was Muslim. On
                    this last point, the Prosecution states that the finding that the Appellant was a ready source of
                    local information for the
                    group about the location of Muslims in the area was not crucial or instrumental to his conviction
                    for persecution. In conclusion, the
                    Prosecution submits that there may have been many reasons why the Appellant might have been reticent
                    about giving details concerning some people but not others. 

70.     As regards the Trial Chamber’s evaluation of the nature of the
                    Appellant’s relationship with

                    Milan Lukić’s group and, in particular, his role as an informant, the relevant findings are as
                    follows:







[t]he Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused did have some association with Milan
                                Lukić’s paramilitary group, but it is not satisfied that he was a member of that group
                                or that (except as otherwise stated) he participated directly in the crimes which that
                                group committed in Višegrad. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that Milan Lukić and most of
                                his associates had not lived in Višegrad for some time, and that they sought the
                                assistance of local Serbs to help them identify the targets of their crimes.The
                                    Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused was acquainted with many members of the
                                    group prior to the events of 1992 and that, because of his close relationship with
                                    Milan Lukić, the Accused was a ready source of local information for the group about
                                    the location of Muslims in the area of Višegrad, and that he gave that information
                                    to the group with the full realisation that it would be used to persecute
                                    Muslims.The Trial Chamber is not satisfied that that association is a
                                sufficient basis by itself for any finding that the Accused shared the general homicidal
                                intentions of that group. To conclude, and as already stated, the Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the Accused
                                was a member of Milan Lukić’s paramilitary group, or that his association with that
                                group was such that it is possible to draw an inference beyond reasonable doubt that the
                                Accused shared the general homicidal intentions of that group.The Trial Chamber is
                                    satisfied that he had some association with that group, in that he willingly acted
                                    as an informant to that group, and that this willingness arose from his close
                                    relationship with Milan Lukić. 



71.     Three pieces of evidence were cited by the Trial Chamber in support of
                    the challenged finding. The Trial Chamber relies on the fact that: First, Milan Lukić and his men,
                    who had not been living in the Višegrad area for some time, needed information on the Muslims living
                    in the area; second, the Appellant was acquainted with most of Milan Lukić’s associates and had a
                    close relationship with Milan Lukić himself; and, third, the Appellant was a ready source of
                    information about the location of Muslims in the area and he gave that information to the group with
                    the full realisation that it would be used to persecute Muslims. The first two of these three pieces
                    of evidence show that the group needed an informant and that the Appellant was able to fulfil that
                    role, but only the third piece of evidence demonstrates that the Appellant actually did so. It must
                    therefore be determined whether, as the Appellant claims, no reasonable trier of fact could to draw
                    the inference the Trial Chamber did based on the evidence available.

72.     The only evidence cited by the Trial Chamber to suggest this conclusion is the testimony of witness VG-14 who testified that, while he was in
                    the hands of the Appellant and Milan Lukić in the red VW Passat, the Appellant pointed out a nearby
                    house and told Milan Lukić that it belonged to a Muslim
                    family. A reading of the relevant transcripts shows that the Prosecution did not focus on this issue and that the witness’s remark was incidental.
                    It should also be noted that, during his testimony, the Appellant was invited by Judge Janu to
                    comment on the words attributed to him by witness VG-14. The Appellant denied that he had ever said
                    such a thing or that he had even been in the same car as witness VG-14 and he asserted that the
                    house in question belonged to a Serb. 

73.    Regarding the role that the Appellant played for the paramilitary group,
                    the Prosecution only alleged that he acted as an informant to the group in its Final Trial Brief and
                    then reproduced this submission in its closing arguments. In its Final Trial Brief, the Prosecution referred the Trial Chamber to other evidence than that
                    given by witness VG-14. However, the Trial Chamber expressly
                    rejected the evidence of witnesses VG-115 and VG-81 as not being sufficiently reliable or
                    credible.

                    Moreover, it may by no means be inferred from the Trial Chamber’s findings of fact on the Musići
                    search that it was satisfied that the Appellant had pointed out the house in question to Milan Lukić
                    and his men.

74.     For the above reasons, the Appeals Chamber finds that no reasonable
                    tribunal could find that the Appellant was an informant to the Milan Lukić group and that he had
                    knowledge that the information would be used to persecute Muslims, based solely on the testimony of
                    witness VG-14. However, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that this erroneous finding does not lead
                    to a miscarriage of justice. In fact, the Trial Chamber found that the Appellant was associated with
                    the Milan Lukić group and held in paragraphs 57, 58 and 60 of the Judgement that the acts of the
                    Appellant were closely related to the armed conflict and that his acts formed part of the widespread
                    and systematic attack against the non-Serb population of the municipality of Višegrad.

75.     Further, the Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding regarding
                    his discriminatory intent, in paragraph 251 of the Judgement, which he submits is based on the
                    erroneous finding that he
                    was an informant to the Milan Lukić group. The Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber did not rely exclusively on the finding that the
                    Appellant was providing information to the Milan Lukić group when it concluded that he had committed
                    the crime with the required criminal intent, but rather the Trial Chamber was clear that the
                    criminal intent must be provided specifically in relation to the Drina River incident. 

76.     The relevant findings of the Trial Chamber were:







The Trial Chamber has already found that the Accused acted as an informant to Milan
                                Lukić’s group, assisting that group in locating the Muslim population of Višegrad. The
                                Trial Chamber has already satisfied itself that the Accused did so with full awareness
                                that the intent of Milan Lukić’s group was to persecute the local Muslim population of
                                Višegrad through the commission of the underlying crimes. The Trial Chamber is satisfied
                                that, in providing information to the group led by Milan Lukić, the Accused shared the
                                intention of that group to persecute the local Muslim civilians on religious or
                                political grounds. In order to convict the Accused for the crime of persecution,
                                however, the Prosecution must also establish that the Accused participated in the
                                commission of a persecutory act with a discriminatory intention. 



77.     The Trial Chamber distinguished between the issue of the Appellant’s
                    sharing the intent of Milan Lukić and his men to persecute Muslim civilians “in general” and the
                    issue of his specific discriminatory intent with respect to the crimes for which he was found
                    guilty, i.e., the killing of five of the seven Muslim men at the Drina River and the inhumane acts
                    committed against the two survivors. With regard to the first point, the Trial Chamber relied on its
                    findings on the Appellant’s role as an informant. On the latter point, the Trial Chamber noted that:







[t]he Trial Chamber is satisfied that the only reasonable inference available on the
                                evidence is that these seven Muslim men were singled out for religious or political
                                reasons, and that the killing of five of them were acts carried out on discriminatory
                                grounds, namely, religious or political. 



78.     However surprising this distinction might be, the Appeals Chamber is of
                    the view that the first finding is superfluous and that the Trial Chamber clearly believed that,
                    even if the Appellant had acted with discriminatory intent in providing information to the group,
                    this by itself did not prove that he had acted with discriminatory intent when he took part in the
                    Drina River incident. Contrary to the submissions of the Appellant, the Trial Chamber did not deduce
                    the discriminatory intent of the Appellant from the fact that he was an informant of the group. The
                    Trial Chamber affirmed that “the acts of the Accused were in fact discriminatory, in that the men
                    were killed only because they were

                    Muslim.” Indeed, no evidence seems to have been tendered which would indicate that the seven

                    Muslims were singled out for any other reason than their ethnicity.

79.    The Appellant has, therefore, not shown how the Trial Chamber’s finding
                    that he was an informant led to a miscarriage of justice. This sub-ground of appeal is, therefore,
                    dismissed.
G. Alleged error as to the role of the Appellant during the
                        searching of the house of witness VG-59’s father in Musići

80.     The Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber's finding that he
                    participated with Milan Lukić and others in searching the house of witness VG-59’s father in Musići.
                    The Appellant maintains that the Trial Chamber erred by not accepting any of his evidence and
                    favouring the version of events provided by witnesses VG-55 and VG-59. The Appellant alleges that these two witnesses’ accounts do not match on some important facts, such
                    as whether Milan Lukić and the Appellant arrived together or separately and the reasons that the Appellant gave for being there. The Prosecution contends that the Appellant simply repeats once again his trial submissions without
                    showing how the Trial Chamber committed an error occasioning a miscarriage of justice. The
                    Prosecution further states that the discrepancies in the evidence pointed out by the Appellant are
                    minor and understandable given the time that had elapsed between the events in question and their
                    testimony and that the discrepancies have no bearing on the finding that the Appellant stood guard
                    during the search, armed with his automatic rifle. 

81.     The relevant findings by the Trial Chamber are as follows:







[t]he Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused participated with Milan Lukić and
                                others in the searching of the house of VG-59’s father in Musići in late May 1992. The
                                Accused admitted that he was present during this incident and that he was armed. The
                                Trial Chamber accepts the version of events given of that incident by witnesses VG-59
                                and VG-55, notwithstanding the different account given by the Accused, which the Trial
                                Chamber rejects as an untruthful attempt to exculpate himself. The evidence of the
                                Accused did not cause the Trial Chamber to have any doubt as to the truth of the
                                evidence of these two witnesses. Both VG-59 and VG-55 knew the Accused from childhood,
                                and neither had any bias against him which would cause them to colour their testimony.
                                In fact, had they wanted to give false evidence against the Accused, they could have
                                exaggerated his role in the crimes committed against the people of Musići, which they
                                did not. They did not suggest that he was otherwise
                                involved in any criminal conduct. Indeed, the Accused gave evidence that, in his view,
                                VG-59’s and
                                VG-55’s evidence was accurate, despite the discrepancies between their account and his
                                own. 



82.     The transcript shows that there is some ambiguity as to who actually
                    said that the Milan Lukić group were looking for someone. Witness VG-55 testified that she heard a
                    person say that Milan Lukić was looking for someone who he thought was hiding at their place, and
                    witness VG-59 testified that the Appellant said this. A further reading of the relevant transcripts
                    reveals that witness VG-55 testified that the Appellant remained on the doorstep as Milan Lukić went
                    inside the house and carried out the search. 

83.     Witness VG-55 testified that the Appellant, Milan Lukić and five or six
                    other men arrived at the house of VG-59’s father and that the Appellant stood in front of the house
                    armed while Milan Lukić was searching it. When asked whether she was told what the men were looking
                    for she replied:







[t]hey were looking for people. They thought someone was hiding there, and they were
                                looking for people to see if they were hiding there then.

                                Q. Were you told this by anybody?A. They said Milan Lukić was looking for some people. He thought that we were harbouring
                                some people, hiding some people in our house.Q. If you say "they," who do you refer to, VG-55?A. Milan Lukić. 



As for the testimony of witness VG-59, he gave evidence that, on that day, the villagers were
                    assembled by the White Eagles at his father’s house and that when his wife, his children and he were taken there, he noticed the
                    Appellant standing on the doorstep. Witness VG-59 further stated that it was the Appellant who
                    actually said that the group was looking for someone.







Q. Did Milan Lukić tell you that he was looking for this Avdo who had allegedly killed a
                                Serb woman?A. No. Mitar Vasiljević said that. 



84.     The Appeals Chamber finds that the two witnesses’ accounts are
                    compatible. The transcripts show that witness VG-55 was at the house of VG-59’s father even before
                    the Appellant and the

                    paramilitary group arrived and that witness VG-59 and his wife and children were only taken later to
                    the house. It is therefore more than likely that when witness VG-59 arrived at the house with other
                    members of his family Milan Lukić had already completed the search described by witness VG-55 and
                    had come back outside, either to take part in assembling the other villagers who were then gathered
                    together at the house of witness VG-59’s father whilst the Appellant continued to stand watch, or to
                    search other houses. It should be noted that witness VG-59 provided no account of Milan Lukić’s
                    search of his
                    father's house, which was described in detail by witness VG-55. However, the testimony of witness

                    VG-59 describes the fact that, while searches were carried out in the other houses in the village
                    and valuables were taken from these houses, the Appellant was standing guard in front of his
                    father’s house.

85.     The Appeals Chamber finds that the alleged contradictions are
                    non-existent, minor or immaterial and that the Appellant has failed to show that no reasonable trier
                    of fact could rely on this evidence in reaching the finding that the Appellant was indeed standing
                    armed guard at the entrance to the house of witness VG-59’s father during the events there and
                    thereby participating in the search of the house. This sub-ground of appeal therefore fails.
H. Summary of findings

86.     The Appeals Chamber dismisses the Appellant’s alleged errors regarding:
                    i) the finding of fact that he was armed on 7 June 1992; ii) the finding of fact that he tried to
                    dissuade Milan Lukić from committing the crimes; iii) the finding of fact that the Appellant was
                    standing some distance away from the group during the shooting; iv) the finding of fact that
                    Appellant was an informant to the Milan Lukić group; and v) the finding of fact regarding the
                    Appellant’s role during the search in Musići. The Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred
                    when it found: i) that the Appellant knew at the Vilina Vlas Hotel that the seven Muslim men were
                    going to be killed; and ii) that the Appellant pointed his gun at the seven Muslim men whilst at the
                    hotel. The question of whether these errors led to a miscarriage of justice will be considered below
                    in relation to the Appeals Chamber’s assessment of whether or not the
                    Appellant shared the intent to kill. 
V. THE APPELLANT’S PARTICIPATION IN A JOINT CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE AND
                    HIS RELATED INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

87.    The Appellant’s fourth (murder), fifth (inhumane acts), sixth
                    (persecution) and seventh (joint criminal enterprise) grounds of appeal are interlinked and share,
                    as a central issue, the Appellant’s mens rea in relation to the Drina River incident. Therefore, the
                    Appeals Chamber has decided to address these four grounds of appeal in the same Chapter of this
                    Judgement. Before presenting the various arguments submitted under these grounds of appeal, the
                    Appeals Chamber will recall the relevant findings of the Trial Chamber.

88.     The Trial Chamber found that the Appellant incurred individual criminal
                    responsibility for the crime of murder (as a crime against humanity) under Count 4 of the
                    Indictment, and for the crime of murder (as a violation of the laws or customs of war) under Count 5
                    of the Indictment in respect of Meho Džafić, Ekrem Džafić, Hasan Kustura, Hasan Mutapčić and Amir
                    Kurtalić, as well as for the crime of inhumane acts (as a crime against humanity) under Count 6 of the
                    Indictment in respect of witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 and persecution by way of murder and inhumane
                    acts under Count 3 of the Indictment. The Trial Chamber applied the established test for determining whether cumulative convictions are
                    permissible and found that persecution pursuant to Article 5(h) of the Statute requires the
                    materially distinct element of a discriminatory act and a discriminatory intent compared to the
                    crimes of murder and inhumane acts. Therefore a conviction was entered for persecution pursuant to
                    Article 5(h) of the Statute, but not for murder and inhumane acts pursuant to Article 5 of the
                    Statute. As a result, the Appellant was convicted for persecution as a crime against humanity under
                    Article 5 of the Statute (Count 3) and for murder under Article 3 of the Statute (Count 5). 

89.     The Trial Chamber found that: i) There was an understanding amounting to
                    an agreement between Milan Lukić, the Appellant and two unidentified men to kill the seven Muslim
                    men, including the two survivors; ii) the Appellant participated in this joint criminal enterprise to murder by preventing the seven
                    Muslim men from fleeing by pointing a gun at them while they were detained at the Vilina Vlas Hotel,
                    by escorting them to the bank of the Drina River and pointing a gun at them to prevent their escape,
                    and by standing behind the Muslim men with his gun together with the other offenders shortly before
                    the shooting occurred; iii) the attempted murder of witnesses VG-14 and VG-
                    32 constituted a serious attack on their human dignity, and caused witnesses VG-14 and VG-32

                    immeasurable mental suffering; iv) the Appellant, by his acts, intended to seriously attack the human dignity of witnesses VG-14
                    and VG-32; and v) the murders and the inhumane acts were discriminatory and that the Appellant shared the
                    discriminatory intent for persecution. The Trial Chamber further considered that, if the agreed
                    crime is committed by one or other of the participants in
                    the joint criminal enterprise, all of them are guilty of the crime regardless of the part played by
                    each in its commission. The Trial Chamber found it unnecessary to deal with the alternative basis of
                    criminal responsibility upon which the Prosecution relied – that of aiding and abetting. 

90.     The Appellant argues, under the seventh ground of appeal, that the Trial
                    Chamber erred in law and in fact when it applied the concept of joint criminal enterprise in this
                    case. The three alleged errors of law relate to the elements required to prove the existence of a
                    joint criminal enterprise. The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber failed to explicitly
                    indicate the criteria it applied, that it erred in finding that an agreement existed and that the Trial Chamber erred in holding that the participants in a joint criminal enterprise are
                    equally guilty. The errors of fact relate to the mens rea of the Appellant and constitute the principal submission
                    common to the Appellant’s fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh grounds of appeal, where he argues that
                    the Trial Chamber erred in determining that he shared the intent to kill the seven Muslim men and to cause witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 “serious mental or physical suffering.” The Appellant also argues in his Additional Appeal Brief that the Trial Chamber erred in finding
                    that he shared the intent of the principal offender. In this respect, the Appellant challenges the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding that the Appellant provided assistance to the other perpetrators and submits that there is no proof of his actual participation in the shooting. 

91.    Under the sixth ground of appeal the Appellant submits that the Trial
                    Chamber erred in finding him guilty of persecution as a crime against humanity for the murder of
                    five Muslim men and the inhumane acts inflicted on two other Muslim men in relation to the Drina
                    River incident under Count 3 of the Indictment. The main argument presented by the Appellant is that
                    he did not act with the requisite
                    discriminatory intent for the crime of persecution. The Appellant is also alleging that the Trial Chamber committed an error of law by “convicting the
                    accused for persecution solely on the basis of one incident.” 

92.     Under the fourth ground of appeal, the Appellant argues that he cannot
                    be convicted cumulatively, in respect of the same conduct, of both murder under Article 3 of the
                    Statute and persecution by way of murder under Article 5 of the Statute. 

93.    Before addressing the above-mentioned arguments, the Appeals Chamber
                    finds it necessary to recall the law applicable to joint criminal enterprise and the differences
                    between participating in a joint criminal enterprise as a co-perpetrator or as an aider and abettor.
A. Law applicable to joint criminal enterprise, participation as
                        a co- perpetrator or as an aider and abettor
1. Joint criminal enterprise

94.     Article 7(1) of the Statute sets out certain forms of individual
                    criminal responsibility which apply to the crimes falling within the International Tribunal’s
                    jurisdiction. It reads as follows:

Article 7

Individual criminal responsibility







1. A person who planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted
                                in the planning, preparation or execution of a crime referred to in articles 2 to 5 of
                                the present Statute, shall be individually responsible for the crime.



95.     This provision lists the forms of criminal conduct which, provided that
                    all other necessary conditions are satisfied, may result in an accused incurring individual criminal
                    responsibility for one or more of the crimes provided for in the Statute. Article 7(1) of the
                    Statute does not make explicit reference to “joint criminal enterprise.” However, the Appeals
                    Chamber has previously held that participation in a joint criminal enterprise is a form of liability
                    which existed in customary international law at the time, that is in 1992, and that such
                    participation is a form of “commission” under Article 7(1)
                    of the Statute. 96.    Three categories of joint criminal enterprise have been identified by the
                    International Tribunal’s jurisprudence. 

97.     The first category is a “basic” form of joint criminal enterprise. It is
                    represented by cases where all co-perpetrators, acting pursuant to a common purpose, possess the
                    same criminal intention. An example is a plan formulated by the participants in the joint criminal enterprise to kill where,
                    although each of the participants may carry out a different role, each of them has the intent to
                    kill.

98.     The second category is a “systemic” form of joint criminal enterprise.
                    It is a variant of the basic form, characterised by the existence of an organised system of
                    ill-treatment. An example is extermination or concentration camps, in which the prisoners are killed or mistreated
                    pursuant to the joint criminal enterprise.

99.     The third category is an “extended” form of joint criminal enterprise.
                    It concerns cases involving a common purpose to commit a crime where one of the perpetrators commits
                    an act which, while outside the common purpose, is nevertheless a natural and foreseeable
                    consequence of the effecting of that common purpose. An example is a common purpose or plan on the part of a group to forcibly remove at gun-point
                    members of one ethnicity from their town, village or region (to effect “ethnic cleansing”)
                    with the consequence that, in the course of doing so, one or more of the victims is shot and killed.
                    While murder may not have been explicitly acknowledged to be part of the common purpose, it was
                    nevertheless foreseeable that the forcible removal of civilians at gunpoint might well result in the
                    deaths of one or more of those civilians.

100.     The actus reus of the participant in a joint criminal enterprise is
                    common to each of the three above categories and comprises the following three elements: First, a
                    plurality of persons is required. They need not be organised in a military, political or
                    administrative structure. Second, the existence of a common purpose which amounts to or involves the commission of a crime
                    provided for in the Statute is required. There is no necessity for this purpose to have been
                    previously arranged or formulated. It may materialise extemporaneously and be inferred from the
                    facts. Third, the participation of the accused in the common purpose is required, which involves
                    the perpetration of one of the crimes provided for in the Statute. This participation need not
                    involve commission of a specific crime under one of the provisions (for example murder,
                    extermination, torture or rape), but may take the form of assistance in, or contribution to, the
                    execution of the common purpose. 

101.     However, the mens rea differs according to the category of joint
                    criminal enterprise under consideration:

                    - With regard to the basic form of joint criminal enterprise what is required is the intent to
                    perpetrate a certain crime (this being the shared intent on the part of all co-perpetrators). - With regard to the systemic form of joint criminal enterprise (which, as noted above, is a variant
                    of the first), personal knowledge of the system of ill-treatment is required (whether proved by
                    express testimony or a matter of reasonable inference from the accused’s position of authority), as
                    well as the intent to further this system of ill-treatment. - With regard to the extended form of joint criminal enterprise, what is required is the intention
                    to participate in and further the common criminal purpose of a group and to contribute to the joint
                    criminal enterprise or in any event to the commission of a crime by the group. In addition,
                    responsibility for a


                    crime other than the one which was part of the common design arises “only if, under the
                    circumstances of the case, (i) it was foreseeable that such a crime might be perpetrated by one or
                    other members of the group and (ii) the accused willingly took that risk” –
                    that is, being aware that such crime was a possible consequence of the execution of that enterprise,
                    and with that awareness, the accused decided to participate in that enterprise.
2. Differences between participating in a joint criminal enterprise as a co-perpetrator or as an
                        aider and abettor

102.    Participation in a joint criminal enterprise is a form of “commission”
                    under Article 7(1) of the Statute.
                    The participant therein is liable as a co-perpetrator of the crime(s).
                    Aiding and abetting the commission of a crime is usually considered to incur a lesser degree of
                    individual criminal responsibility than committing a crime.
                    In the context of a crime committed by several co-perpetrators in a joint criminal enterprise,
                    the aider and abettor is always an accessory to these co-perpetrators, although the co- perpetrators
                    may not even know of the aider and abettor’s contribution.
                    Differences exist in relation to the actus reus as well as to the mens rea requirements between both
                    forms of individual criminal responsibility:

(i)The aider and abettor carries out acts specifically directed to assist, encourage or lend moral
                    support to the perpetration of a certain specific crime (
                    murder, extermination, rape, torture, wanton destruction of civilian property, etc.), and this
                    support has a substantial effect upon the perpetration of the crime.
                    By contrast, it is sufficient for a participant in a joint criminal enterprise to perform acts that
                    in some way are directed to the furtherance of the common design.

(ii) In the case of aiding and abetting, the requisite mental element is knowledge that the acts
                    performed by the aider and abettor assist the commission of the specific crime of the principal.
                    By contrast, in the case of participation in a joint criminal enterprise, i.e. as a co-perpetrator,
                    the requisite mens rea is intent to pursue a common purpose.
B. Alleged errors of law
1. Alleged errors of law related to the concept of joint criminal enterprise

103.    Before turning to the alleged errors of law of the Trial Chamber
                    concerning the concept of joint criminal enterprise and persecution,
                    the Appeals Chamber will first determine under which category of joint criminal enterprise the Drina
                    River incident falls.

104.    In the present case, the Trial Chamber considered the first and second
                    categories of joint criminal enterprise. 

105.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that the second category of joint criminal
                    enterprise is the so-called “concentration camp” cases.
                    In this category of joint criminal enterprise, the co-perpetrator must have a personal knowledge of
                    a system of ill-treatment, as well as the intent to further this system of ill- treatment. The Appeals Chamber is of the view that, in light of the factual circumstances surrounding the Drina
                    River incident, the latter does not fall within the second category of joint criminal enterprise.

106.    The Appeals Chamber further finds that the responsibility of the
                    Appellant could have been envisaged under the third category of joint criminal enterprise (extended
                    form),
                    but that it was clearly not pleaded by the Prosecution.
                    In this respect, the Trial Chamber considered in paragraph 63 of the Judgement that







[i]n the Indictment, the Prosecution alleges that the Accused “acted in concert”
                                with Milan Lukić Sredoje Lukić and other unknown individuals with respect to acts of
                                extermination, persecution, murder,
                                inhumane acts and violence to life and person. At the Pre-Trial Conference on 20 July
                                2001, the Prosecution was asked to state clearly what
                                it meant by the use of the term “in concert”. The Prosecution initially stated that all
                                it was trying to convey was that the
                                Accused was not acting alone and that he did not commit the crimes by himself, but it
                                was eventually agreed that the Prosecution was relying upon a joint criminal enterprise.
                                The Prosecution did not plead the extended form of joint criminal enterprise […].
                                Indeed, when asked, counsel for the Prosecution expressly disclaimed any intention to
                                rely upon such a case.



107.    For the above reasons, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that only the
                    first category is relevant.
                    The Appellant alleges three errors of law related to the concept of joint criminal enterprise.
                    According to the first alleged error, the Trial Chamber failed to explicitly indicate which exact
                    criteria it applied to assess the existence of a joint criminal enterprise.
                    The Appeals Chamber recalls that paragraphs 63 to 69 of the Judgement clearly set out the
                    Prosecution’s case as well as the applicable law.
                    Furthermore, contrary to the Appellant’s submission, paragraphs 206 to 211, as well as paragraphs
                    238 to 240 of the Judgement clearly indicate the criteria the
                    Trial Chamber applied in order to determine whether the Appellant participated in a joint criminal
                    enterprise to murder the seven Muslim men.
                    Therefore, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant’s submission is not well founded. This
                    sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.

108.    Second, the Appellant alleges that the Trial Chamber erred in finding
                    that the existence of an arrangement or understanding amounting to an agreement
                    between two or more persons need not be expressed but can also be inferred. The Prosecution responds that this argument is not tenable, and refers in support to the Appeals
                    Chamber’s findings
                    in the Tadić Appeals Judgement and the Furund`ija Appeals Judgement. The Appellant replies that, in any event, it is not clear from the evidence that such an agreement
                    existed. 

109.    It clearly results fromTadićAppeals Judgement that “[t]here is
                    no necessity for th[e] plan, design or purpose to have been previously arranged or formulated.
                    The common plan or purpose may materialise extemporaneously and be inferred from the fact that a
                    plurality of persons acts in unison to
                    put into effect a joint criminal enterprise.” The Appeals Chamber in the Furund`ija Appeals Judgement relied on this reasoning,
                    when it identified the legal elements of co–perpetration in a joint criminal enterprise. The Appeals Chamber finds, therefore, that the Appellant’s submission is not well founded and this
                    sub-ground of appeal must fail.

110.    Third, the Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding that,
                    if the agreed crime is committed by one or more of the participants in a joint criminal enterprise,
                    all of the participants are equally guilty of the crime regardless of the part played by each in its
                    commission. The Prosecution submits that the Appellant confuses the questions of criminal liability and
                    sentencing, and that it is well established in relation to criminal liability
                    that participation in a joint criminal enterprise is a method of “committing” the crime within the
                    meaning of Article 7(1) of the Statute. In the Defence Reply, the Appellant submits that it agrees with the Prosecution that criminal
                    liability and sentencing are two separate questions,
                    but argues that the Trial Chamber committed an error in sentencing when it “expressly
                    had regard to the nature of the Appellant’s role in the joint criminal enterprise.” 

111.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that the case-law of the Tribunal stemming
                    from the Tadić
                    Appeals Judgement and the Ojdanić Decision regards participation in a joint criminal enterprise as a
                    form of commission.
                    In light of this established case-law, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not
                    established that the
                    Trial Chamber erred in finding all of the participants in the joint criminal enterprise to be
                    equally guilty of the crime regardless of the part played by each in its commission.
                    The Appeals Chamber considers further that the Appellant has not elaborated on what error the
                    Trial Chamber would have made with regard to sentencing. This sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
2. Alleged error of law by convicting the Appellant for persecution based on only one
                        incident

112.    In his sixth ground of appeal the Appellant submits that the Trial
                    Chamber made an error of law “by convicting the accused
                    for persecution solely on the basis of one incident which occurred on June 7, 1992 at the Drina
                    River.” According to the Appellant, the case law of this Tribunal shows that convictions for persecution are
                    generally based
                    on the alleged role of an accused in numerous acts.
                    In the absence of numerous offences, evidence of the requisite discriminatory intent must be applied
                    with great caution. In response, the Prosecution submits that in law “a single act may constitute persecution,
                    if there is clear evidence of the discriminatory mental state.” The present case cannot be seen as an “isolated incident,” as the Milan Lukić group committed
                    various crimes against the Muslim population.
                    The Prosecution takes the view that there is no reason why the Appellant should not be convicted of
                    persecution as a participant in it,
                    even if he was not convicted in relation to any other incident. In reply, the Appellant argues that “a single event may only constitute persecution
                    when there is clear evidence of the discriminatory intent” and that, in the present case,
                    such clear evidence of the discriminatory intent of the Appellant is not available. 

113.    The Appeals Chamber does not subscribe to the views of the Appellant
                    that the Trial Chamber erred in finding him guilty of persecution “solely on the basis of one
                    incident,” First, the Drina River incident consists of the murder of five people and the inhumane acts
                    inflicted on two others.
                    This incident cannot be described as a single act but rather as a series of acts.
                    Second, as held by the Appeals Chamber in theKrnojelacAppeals Judgement, persecution is “an
                    act or omission which discriminates in fact and which:
                    denies or infringes upon a fundamental right laid down in international customary or treaty law (theactus reus);
                    and was carried out deliberately with the intention to discriminate on one of the listed grounds,
                    specifically race,
                    religion or politics (themens rea).” Although persecution often refers to a series of acts, a single act may be sufficient, as long as this act or omission discriminates in fact and is carried out deliberately with the
                    intention to discriminate on one of the listed grounds.
                    The Appeals Chamber therefore finds that this sub-ground of appeal is without merit.

114.    In conclusion, the Appellant’s four sub-grounds of appeal alleging
                    errors of law are dismissed and
                    the Appeals Chamber now turns to the alleged errors relating to themens reaof the
                    Appellant.
                    In the present case, the Appellant did not allege that the Trial Chamber erred when it found that
                    theactus reusof the crime was established.
                    His arguments on appeal relate to hismens rea.
                    The Appeals Chamber will therefore consider theactus reusof the Appellant only if it finds
                    that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that the Appellant had the intent to kill the seven
                    Muslim men.
C. Alleged errors relating to the Appellant’s mens rea to kill the seven Muslim men

115.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that he
                    shared the intent to kill the seven Muslim men. 

116.    The Trial Chamber inferred the intent of the Appellant from his actions, which are described in paragraph 209 of the Judgement as follows:







[t]he Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused personally participated in this
                                joint criminal enterprise
                                by preventing the seven Muslim men from fleeing by pointing a gun at them while they
                                were detained at the Vilina Vlas Hotel,
                                by escorting them to the bank of the Drina River and pointing a gun at them to prevent
                                their escape,
                                and by standing behind the Muslim men with his gun together with the other three
                                offenders shortly before the shooting started.



117.    The Appellant argues that these acts are not conclusive proof of his
                    intention that the seven Muslim men be killed, as required for murder. In support of his argument, the Appellant states that he was not armed that day and did not point a
                    gun at the seven men
                    in the Vilina Vlas Hotel and that the intention of Milan Lukić
                    at the time the group was in the hotel was not to kill the seven Muslim men but to imprison them.
                    He further argues that witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 described differently how they moved towards the
                    Drina River and that their testimonies
                    do not support a finding that the Appellant pointed a gun at the seven Muslim men and prevented
                    their escape.
                    The Appellant also argues that he was standing 10 to 15 meters behind Milan Lukić and the other two
                    men when the shooting occurred. 

118.    The Prosecution responds that it is for the Appellant to demonstrate
                    that the Trial Chamber’s conclusion
                    was so unreasonable that no reasonable trier of fact could have come to this conclusion. The Prosecution submits that it was open to a reasonable trier of fact to conclude,
                    on the basis of the totality of circumstances and evidence, that the Appellant, as demonstrated by
                    his actions,
                    intended that the seven Muslim men be killed, whether or not he actually carried out any of those
                    killings himself. 

119.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that to find the individual criminal
                    responsibility
                    of a co- perpetrator in a joint criminal enterprise, the Prosecution must establish that
                    i) an accused voluntarily participated in one aspect of the common purpose
                    (for instance, by inflicting non-fatal violence upon the victim, or by providing material assistance
                    to or facilitating the activities of his co-perpetrators)
                    even if he or she did not physically commit the crime; and ii)
                    the accused, even if not personally effecting the crime, nevertheless intended this result.

120.    The Appeals Chamber further recalls that the standard of proof to be
                    applied
                    is beyond a reasonable doubt, and the burden lies on the Prosecution as the accused enjoys the
                    benefit of the presumption of innocence.
                    The Appeals Chamber agrees with the test adopted by the Trial Chamber according to which,
                    when the Prosecution relies upon proof of the state of mind of an accused by inference,
                    that inference must be the only reasonable inference available on the evidence. 

121.    The Appeals Chamber is to determine whether the Trial Chamber erred in
                    applying the above burden of proof standard in concluding:







[a]lthough the Trial Chamber is not satisfied that it has been established that
                                the Accused actually killed anyone or more of the victims, it is nevertheless satisfied
                                that the only reasonable inference available on the evidence is that the Accused,
                                by his actions, intended that the seven Muslim men be killed,
                                whether or not he actually carried out any of those killings himself. 



In other words, the question is whether no reasonable tribunal could have found that the only
                    reasonable
                    inference from the evidence was that the Appellant by his actions intended to kill the seven Muslim
                    men.

122.    The analysis of the Appellant’s intent is broken down below into two
                    stages.
                    First, the Vilina Vlas Hotel stage: with respect to which the Trial Chamber concluded that the
                    Appellant knew that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed.
                    Second: the stage from the time they parked the cars in Sase, at which point the Appellant admits
                    that he knew that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed.
1. The intent of the Appellant at the time the group left the Vilina Vlas Hotel

123.    The Appeals Chamber notes that the Trial Chamber found that the
                    Appellant did not share the general homicidal intent of the Milan Lukić group. The Trial Chamber found that the Appellant was armed in the Vilina Vlas Hotel,
                    pointing his gun at the seven Muslim men to prevent them from fleeing and that he knew
                    that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed and not exchanged. 

124.    The Appeals Chamber found above that the Trial Chamber was reasonable in
                    finding that the Appellant was armed
                    in the Vilina Vlas Hotel but that it erred in finding that the Appellant pointed his gun at the
                    seven men,
                    whilst at the hotel. Moreover, the Appeals Chamber has found that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the Appellant
                    had knowledge
                    that the seven Muslim men were to be killed and not exchanged based on the information provided to
                    him by
                    Stanko Pecikoza in the car going from Višegrad to the Vilina Vlas Hotel. The question of whether these errors led to a miscarriage of justice will now be considered in
                    relation
                    to the Appeals Chamber’s assessment of whether or not the Appellant shared the intent to kill.

125.    The Trial Chamber found that Milan Lukić and two unidentified men
                    forcibly detained the seven Muslim men, took them to the reception area of the Vilina Vlas Hotel, where Milan Lukić was searching for some
                    keys, while one of the unidentified armed men guarded them by pointing his automatic rifle at them. The Trial Chamber found that when one of the Muslim men asked about their fate, this unidentified
                    man answered that they were to be exchanged. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber was satisfied that when Milan Lukić could not find the keys, he
                    ordered the group to get into the cars.
                    The Muslim men in one of the two cars were once again told that they were going to be exchanged. 

126.    The issue of whether the Appellant pointed his gun at the seven Muslim
                    men at the hotel is not, as such,
                    a decisive factor in determining the intent of the Appellant to kill the seven Muslim men.
                    He was armed in the hotel and thereby assisted in preventing the seven Muslim men from fleeing.
                    However, the Appeals Chamber finds that since the Appellant lacked, at that time,
                    the knowledge that the seven Muslim men were to be killed, the fact that he prevented
                    the Muslim men from fleeing at the hotel is not decisive as to whether or not he shared the intent
                    to kill them.
                    Therefore, no reasonable trier of fact could rely on the actions of the Appellant while at the hotel
                    in support of a conclusion that he had the intent to kill the seven Muslim men at that time.

127.    In concluding that the Appellant had the intent to kill the seven Muslim
                    men,
                    the Trial Chamber also relied on his actions from the moment the Lukić group parked the cars in
                    Sase.
                    The Trial Chamber found in this respect that the only reasonable inference available on the evidence
                    was that the Appellant intended that the Muslim men be killed.
                    The Appeals Chamber will now consider whether a reasonable Trial Chamber could have reached this
                    conclusion.
2. The intent of the Appellant from the time the group parked their cars in Sase

128.    The Trial Chamber found that the only reasonable inference from the
                    Appellant’s actions
                    was that he shared the intent to kill the seven Muslim men.
                    The Appeals Chamber concurs with the Trial Chamber that the test when inferring intent from the acts
                    of an accused
                    is that the inference has to be “the only reasonable inference available.” At the time the cars containing the seven Muslim men, the Milan Lukić
                    group and the Appellant, were parked in Sase, the Appellant admits that he knew that the seven
                    Muslim men were to be killed. The Appeals Chamber recalls that it has dismissed the Appellant’s alleged errors regarding the fact
                    that he was not armed on 7 June 1992
                    and the fact that he was standing at a distance away from the group during the shooting.
                    The Appeals Chamber has also dismissed the claim by the Appellant that the Trial Chamber erred by
                    not believing that he tried to prevent Milan Lukić from committing the murders.
                    The Appeals Chamber notes that the Trial Chamber does not refer to this element in paragraph 209 of
                    the Judgement when it lists the Appellant’s actions relied on to infer his intent.

129.    The actions of the Appellant from the moment the cars stopped in Sase,
                    upon which the Trial Chamber relied to infer that he intended that the seven Muslim men to be
                    killed,
                    are the following: While Milan Lukić, the two unidentified men and the Appellant escorted the seven
                    Muslim men to the bank of the Drina River,
                    the Appellant pointed a gun at them to prevent their escape.
                    Then, the Appellant stood behind the seven Muslim men with his gun shortly before the shooting
                    occurred.
                    The Trial Chamber did not find, however, that the Appellant acted at the same level of authority or
                    with the same degree of control over the killings as the other three actors.
                    To the contrary, the Trial Chamber stated that it is “is not satisfied that the Prosecution has
                    established beyond reasonable doubt
                    that the Accused fired his weapon at the same time as the other three, or that he personally killed
                    anyone or more of the victims”. The Trial Chamber did not even explicitly find that the Appellant pointed his gun at the seven
                    Muslim men while they were lining up facing the Drina River.

130.    In addition to these findings, the Appeals Chamber takes into
                    consideration:
                    i) the overall context of the Drina River incident;
                    ii) the previous association of the Appellant with the Milan Lukić group at Musići as well as at the
                    Vilina Vlas Hotel, although he was not found to be a member of the group;
                    iii) the Appellant’s participation with Milan Lukić and others in searching the house of witness
                    VG-59’s father in Musići;
                    iv) the fact that Milan Lukić and the two unidentified men forcibly detained the seven Muslim men;
                    the Appellant, who was armed in the hotel,
                    thereby assisted in preventing the seven Muslim men from fleeing from the hotel;
                    v) the fact that the Appellant did not know until the car stopped in Sase that the seven Muslim men
                    were to be killed;
                    vi) the behaviour of the soldiers changed drastically from the moment Milan Lukić ordered them to
                    leave the car; vii) that throughout the entire incident the impression of the two survivors was that no one around
                    Milan Lukić could have influenced him or his decisions; and viii) that the Appellant willingly accompanied Milan Lukić and his group with the seven Muslim
                    men to the Drina River. 

131.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that the question before it is whether no
                    reasonable tribunal could find
                    that the only reasonable inference available on the evidence cited above was that the Appellant
                    shared the intent to commit murder.
                    The Appeals Chamber considers that when a Chamber is confronted with the task of determining
                    whether it can infer from the acts of an accused that he or she shared the intent to commit a crime,
                    special attention must be paid to whether these acts are ambiguous, allowing for several reasonable
                    inferences.
                    The Appeals Chamber is satisfied that no reasonable tribunal could have found that the only
                    reasonable inference available on the evidence,
                    as cited above, is that the Appellant had the intent to kill the seven Muslim men.
                    The Trial Chamber found that the Appellant assisted Milan Lukić and his men by preventing the seven
                    Muslim men from fleeing. It did not find, however, that the Appellant shot at the Muslim men himself, nor that he exercised
                    control over the firing.
                    Compared to the involvement of Milan Lukić and potentially one or both of the other men,
                    the participation of the Appellant in the overall course of the killings did not reach the same
                    level.
                    The above-mentioned acts of the Appellant were ambiguous as to whether or not the Appellant intended
                    that the seven Muslim men be killed.
                    This conclusion is further supported by the relatively short period of time between the change of
                    attitude of Milan Lukić and the shooting,
                    the strong personality of Milan Lukić compared to the Appellant, as well as the factors mentioned in
                    paragraph 130.
                    The Appeals Chamber, therefore, concludes that the Trial Chamber erred by finding that the only
                    reasonable inference
                    from the evidence was that the Appellant shared the intent to kill the seven Muslim men.

132.    The error made by the Trial Chamber led to a miscarriage of justice
                    since, without the proof the Appellant's intent,
                    the Appellant would not be responsible as a co-perpetrator in the joint criminal enterprise.
                    The Appeals Chamber will now consider whether the Appellant is, nevertheless, responsible as an
                    aider and abettor.


3. Aiding and abetting

133.    The Appeals Chamber has found above that the Trial Chamber erred by
                    finding
                    that the only reasonable inference from the evidence was that the Appellant shared the intent to
                    kill the seven Muslim men.
                    The Appellant argues under his fourth ground of appeal that his actions do not in fact amount to
                    aiding and abetting, as he did not facilitate the commission of the crime.
                    He submits that Milan Lukić and the two unidentified men did not need any help from the Appellant at
                    the Vilina Vlas Hotel or at the Drina River, since they had managed to detain the seven Muslim men on the hill of Bikavac by themselves, despite
                    the fact that the seven Muslim men could have resisted. The Appellant infers from this that it would not be logical to conclude that Milan Lukić
                    and his men needed the assistance of the Appellant at the Vilina Vlas Hotel or at the Drina River as
                    the risk that the seven Muslim men might resist was less important at this stage. 

134.    The Appeals Chamber has already found that the Appellant knew that the
                    seven Muslim men were to be killed;
                    that he walked armed with the group from the place where they had parked the cars to the Drina
                    River;
                    that he pointed his gun at the seven Muslim men;
                    and that he stood behind the Muslim men with his gun together with the other three offenders shortly
                    before the shooting started.
                    The Appeals Chamber believes that the only reasonable inference available on the totality of
                    evidence is that the Appellant knew that his acts would assist the commission of the murders.
                    The Appeals Chamber finds that in preventing the men from escaping on the way to the river bank and
                    during the shooting,
                    the Appellant’s actions had a “substantial effect upon the perpetration of the crime.” 

135.    The Appeals Chamber finds that the acts of the Appellant were
                    specifically directed to assist the perpetration
                    of the murders and the inhumane acts and his support had a substantial effect upon the perpetration
                    of the crimes.
                    The Appeals Chamber therefore finds the Appellant guilty for aiding and abetting murder pursuant to
                    Article 3 of the Statute (Count 5).
                    Further, the Appeals Chamber finds the Appellant guilty as an aider and abettor for murder as a
                    crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5(a)
                    of the Statute (Count 4) and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5(i) of
                    the Statute (Count 6).
                    However, the Appellant is not convicted of the murder as a crime against humanity pursuant to
                    Article 5(a) of the Statute (Count 4)
                    and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5(i) of the Statute (Count 6)
                    in accordance with the Tribunal's jurisprudence on cumulative convictions. 


D. The alleged errors relating to persecution
1. The Appellant’s intent to persecute

136.    First, the Appellant contends that the Trial Chamber erred in finding
                    that the Appellant had the requisite discriminatory
                    intent as he did not take part in the “singling out”
                    of the seven Muslim men, he did not know why they were arrested or what Milan Lukić wanted to do
                    with them.
                    In addition, the Appellant argued that he did not take part in the planning of the execution of the
                    Muslim men but only became involved at a later stage. In response, the Prosecution submits that the Trial Chamber’s conclusion,
                    that the Appellant acted with the relevant discriminatory intent when participating in the Drina
                    River incident,
                    was “the only reasonable conclusion open to a reasonable trier of fact” in light of all the evidence
                    in the case as a whole. That the Appellant did not participate in the “singling out” of the Muslim men, the Prosecution
                    submits is unfounded.
                    According to the Prosecution, there is no reason “why a relevant discriminatory intent cannot be
                    inferred from an accused’s
                    knowing participation in the joint criminal enterprise to commit a crime on relevantly
                    discriminatory grounds merely because the accused does not personally select the victims.” 

137.    Second, the Appellant submits that a discriminatory intent by itself is
                    insufficient to establish the crime of persecution;
                    the particular act or omission must also have discriminatory consequences.
                    The Appellant cannot be found responsible for the discriminatory consequences of the persecution as
                    he did not personally participate in the “singling out” of the seven Muslim men. In response, the Prosecution recalls that the Trial Chamber expressly found in relation of the Drina
                    River incident that “the acts of the Accused were in fact discriminatory,
                    in that the men were killed only because they were Muslims.” 

138.    Third, the Appellant takes the view that the Trial Chamber did not apply
                    the Tribunal’s case law relating to persecution
                    and did not assess whether the “accused consciously intend[ed] to discriminate.” Since the evidence in this case shows at the most that the “Appellant was possibly aware
                    of the discriminatory intentions of Mr Lukić,” the intent to discriminate, which must be a
                    “significant intent,”
                    was not proven beyond reasonable doubt. In response, the Prosecution argues that the Trial Chamber expressly found that the requirement of
                    “conscious” intent was satisfied
                    on the evidence in this case and that the Defence did not demonstrate that this finding was
                    unreasonable. 

139.    The Trial Chamber’s finding on the requisite discriminatory intent of
                    the Appellant was based on the acts
                    of the Appellant during the Drina River incident, considered in their overall context.
                    Contrary to the submissions of the Appellant, the Trial Chamber made it clear in paragraph 251 of
                    the Judgement,
                    that regardless of whether or not the Appellant was an informant, or whether or not he shared the
                    intention of the group to persecute the Muslim population,
                    the Prosecution has to establish that the Accused participated in the commission of a persecutory
                    act with a discriminatory intention. In paragraphs 254 and 255, the Trial Chamber assessed whether the acts of the Appellant during the
                    Drina River incident showed that he possessed
                    the requisitemens reafor the crime of persecution. This approach was recently upheld by the Appeals Chamber in theKrnojelacAppeals Judgement. 

140.    Furthermore, contrary to the submissions of the Appellant,
                    the Trial Chamber did not deduce the discriminatory intent of the Appellant from the fact that the
                    seven Muslim men were singled out by him.
                    The Trial Chamber affirmed that “the acts of the Accused were in fact discriminatory, in that the
                    men were killed only because they were Muslims.” His participation in the joint criminal enterprise at the Vilina Vlas Hotel,
                    during the transfer of the victims to the bank of the Drina River and the events that took place
                    there, represent,
                    the concrete acts of the Appellant from which the Trial Chamber inferred that his actions had
                    discriminatory consequences
                    and that he possessed the requisite discriminatory intent for the crime of persecution.
                    The Appellant’s arguments with respect to the approach taken by the Trial Chamber in assessing
                    whether he had the discriminatory intent to persecute are therefore rejected.

141.    The Appeals Chamber also has to determine whether the Trial Chamber
                    erred in finding that the Appellant incurred individual criminal responsibility for the crime of
                    persecution
                    based on the underlying crimes of murder and inhumane acts. The Appeals Chamber already concluded that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the Appellant
                    possessed the intent to kill.
                    The intent to kill the seven Muslim men, including the two survivors, constituted the basis for the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding that the Appellant
                    was a co-perpetrator to a joint criminal enterprise. In the absence of this intent, no reasonable trier of fact could have found the Appellant
                    responsible for committing the crime of
                    persecution by way of murders and inhumane acts as a co-perpetrator to the joint criminal
                    enterprise.
                    This error resulted in a miscarriage of justice.
2. Aiding and abetting the joint criminal enterprise of persecution

142.    The Appeals Chamber will now consider whether the Appellant incurs
                    individual criminal responsibility
                    under Article 7(1) of the Statute for aiding and abetting the persecution of the
                    Muslim men by his participation in the killings on the bank of the Drina River.
                    In order to convict him for aiding and abetting the crime of persecution, the Appeals Chamber must
                    establish that the Appellant
                    had knowledge that the principal perpetrators of the joint criminal enterprise intended to commit
                    the underlying crimes,
                    and by their acts they intended to discriminate against the Muslim population, and that, with that
                    knowledge,
                    the Appellant made a substantial contribution to the commission of the discriminatory acts by the
                    principal perpetrators. 

143.    In the Appeals Chamber’s view,
                    it is beyond doubt that the acts committed by Milan Lukić and the two other men amount to the crime
                    of persecution:
                    They killed the five Muslim men and committed inhumane acts against the two survivors with the
                    deliberate intent to discriminate on religious or political grounds.
                    Furthermore, the Appeals Chamber concurs with the findings of the Trial Chamber that the Appellant
                    participated in the
                    Drina River incident “with full awareness that the intent of the Milan Lukić’s group was to
                    persecute the local
                    Muslim population of Višegrad through the commission of the underlying crimes.” The only reason why the seven Muslim men were arrested and killed was because of their belonging to
                    the Muslim population of Višegrad.
                    The Appellant was aware of these facts and he willingly participated in the Drina River incident by
                    pointing his gun at the victims and preventing them from fleeing.
                    Even if it has not been established beyond reasonable doubt that he personally killed the five
                    Muslim men,
                    his support had a substantial effect upon the perpetration of the crimes on the bank of the Drina
                    River.
                    He was at that time fully aware that his participation assisted the commission of the crime of
                    persecution by the principal perpetrators.
                    The Appellant is therefore responsible for having aided and abetted the crime of persecution by way
                    of murder of the five Muslim men and of inhumane acts against the two other Muslim men (Count 3).
                    The finding that the Appellant is responsible for aiding and abetting persecution has an impact on
                    other
                    crimes for which he is found responsible, and the cumulative conviction is discussed below.
E. Alleged error in applying cumulative convictions for Article 3 and Article 5 of the
                        Statute

144.    The Appellant argues that he cannot be convicted cumulatively, in
                    respect of the same conduct,
                    of both murder under Article 3 of the Statute (Count 5) and persecution by way of murder under
                    Article 5(a) of the Statute (Count 4). 

145.    The Appeals Chamber considers that this as an alleged error of law.
                    The jurisprudence of the Tribunal on this issue is settled and it holds that it is permissible
                    to convict for a murder under Article 3 of the Statute and persecution by way of murder under
                    Article 5
                    of the Statute as each of them has a materially distinct element from the other: “Article 3 requires
                    a close link between the acts of the accused and the armed conflict; this element is not required by
                    Article 5.
                    On the other hand, Article 5 requires proof that the act occurred as part of a widespread or
                    systematic attack against a
                    civilian population; that element is not required by Article 3.” The Appeals Chamber therefore finds that this sub-ground fails.

146.    With respect to the other charges within Article 5 of the Statute,
                    the Trial Chamber found that persecution under Article 5(h) of the Statute (Count 3)
                    requires the materially distinct elements of a discriminatory act and a discriminatory intent and is
                    therefore more
                    specific than murder as a crime against humanity under Article 5(a) of the Statute (Count 4) and
                    inhumane acts as a
                    crime against humanity under Article 5(i) of the Statute (Count 6).
                    By applying the case-law on cumulative convictions to the present case, the Appellant is
                    convicted of murder under Article 3 of the Statute (Count 5) and persecution under Article 5(h) of
                    the Statute (Count 3).
F. Summary of findings

147.    The Appeals Chamber finds the Appellant guilty of aiding
                    and abetting the crime of murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war under Article 3
                    of the Statute (Count 5) and the crime of persecution under Article 5(h) of the Statute by way
                    of murder of the five Muslim men and of inhumane acts against the two other Muslim men (Count 3).
VI. SENTENCING

148.    The Appellant submits in his eighth ground of appeal that the Trial
                    Chamber
                    erred both in law and fact when it sentenced him to twenty years of imprisonment for persecution
                    as a crime against humanity (Count 3) and murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count
                    5).
                    The Appellant argues that the sentence imposed upon him is extremely high and that he was sentenced
                    more than once
                    for the same act despite the Trial Chamber’s statement to the contrary.
                    The Appellant requests that the Appeals Chamber acquit him or grant him a new trial.
                    Alternatively, the Appellant submits that the sentence should be reduced. The Prosecution argues that the Appellant did not establish in this ground of appeal that the Trial
                    Chamber committed a discernible error in the exercise of its discretion and thus the appeal against
                    sentence should be dismissed. 

149.    The Appeals Chamber has overturned the Trial Chamber’s finding that the
                    Appellant was responsible,
                    as a co-perpetrator in a joint criminal enterprise, for murder as a violation of the laws or customs
                    of war under Article 3
                    of the Statute and persecution by way of murder and inhumane acts under Article 5(h) of the Statute.
                    Instead, the Appeals Chamber has found the Appellant responsible as an aider and abettor.
                    This new finding in relation to the form of responsibility raises the question as to whether an
                    adjustment of the sentence is necessary.
                    This matter does not warrant a complete rehearing on the issue of sentence.
                    However, it is appropriate that the Appeals Chamber first considers and resolves the issues raised
                    in the Appellant’s grounds
                    of appeal relating to sentence before considering what, if any, adjustment, arising out of this
                    appeal, should be made.
A. The Appellant’s arguments relating to sentencing
1. Sentence of the Appellant is too high in comparison with previous case-law 

150.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that,
                    even though it had considered sentences in other cases in accordance with the Kupreškić Appeals
                    Judgement,
                    such consideration was of little assistance in this case. According to the Appellant, a review of the case- law of the International Tribunal relating to
                    sentencing
                    reveals that he was given an exceptionally high sentence. In support of his argument, the Appellant refers to sentences imposed in other cases. 

151.    The Prosecution submits that the only case that may resemble the
                    circumstances of the present case isTadić,
                    who was convicted of murder under Articles 2, 3 and 5 of the Statute despite the fact that it was
                    not
                    proven that he personally killed any of the victims. Following the final sentencing appeal, Duško Tadić was sentenced to twenty years imprisonment. 

152.    The Appeals Chamber finds that, even though circumstances in one case
                    may resemble the circumstances in another,
                    the Appellant has failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in the exercise of its
                    discretion by imposing the sentence.
                    Therefore, this sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
2. Alleged errors relating to aggravating factors

153.    The Appellant raises several sub-grounds of appeal relating to the
                    aggravating factors that the Trial Chamber considered in sentencing.
(a) The method of killing

154.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the
                    victims were killed “efficiently”
                    to avoid the problem of having to bury them.
                    He argues that it could not be an aggravating factor as it is unclear whether the Trial Chamber
                    considered shooting as the method of killing as aggravating or whether it considered the issue of
                    burying as aggravating. He further submits that it cannot be an aggravating factor in relation to his sentence because he
                    neither
                    knew nor decided where and how Milan Lukić and the other men were to shoot the seven Muslim men. 

155.    The Prosecution submits that the Trial Chamber referred to the
                    cold-blooded nature
                    of the killings of multiple victims rather than the efficiency of the commission of the crime and that it is within the Trial Chamber’s discretion to regard this as an aggravating factor. 

156.    The Appeals Chamber has ruled that







[t]he sentences to be imposed must reflect the inherent gravity of the criminal
                                conduct of the accused.
                                The determination of the gravity of the crime requires a consideration of the particular
                                circumstances of the case,
                                as well as the form and degree of the participation of the accused in the crime. 



157.    The Appeals Chamber notes that the method and circumstances surrounding
                    a killing are factors which normally would be taken into account
                    in a Trial Chamber’s consideration of the “inherent gravity” of the offence.
                    In the present case, it was considered as an aggravating factor.
                    The Appeals Chamber holds that the Trial Chamber did not err in doing so.
                    The Appeals Chamber considers that it is irrelevant whether the Appellant was personally involved in
                    the decision-making prior to the killing or
                    in determining the method used to kill the seven Muslim men.
                    The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not demonstrated that the Trial Chamber committed
                    an error in exercising its discretion.
                    Therefore, this sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
(b) Verbal abuse of the victims

158.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred by accepting verbal
                    abuse of the victims as an aggravating factor.
                    He challenges whether the verbal abuse occurred and whether he personally so abused anyone. 

159.    The Prosecution submits that one of the main witnesses in the Drina
                    River incident, witness VG-32, testified that verbal abuse occurred. The Prosecution argues that the Trial Chamber has the discretion to consider verbal abuse as an
                    aggravating factor and that the question
                    of whether the Appellant took part in the abuse has no relevance, since the abuse lends seriousness
                    to the joint criminal enterprise. 

160.    The fact that the victims were verbally abused was accepted by the Trial
                    Chamber based on the testimony of VG-32, who stated that “they were cussing [sic],
                    swearing, cussing [sic] our balija mothers, saying ‘walk up there, you balija’ and all other swear
                    words.” The other main witness of the Drina River incident, witness VG-14, did not testify about verbal
                    abuse. However, he was not asked whether they occurred or not.
                    The Appeals Chamber finds that it was reasonable for the Trial Chamber to conclude that verbal abuse
                    took place although only VG-32 gave evidence about it.

161.    Verbal abuse has not been used previously at the International Tribunal
                    as an aggravating factor.
                    The Statute and the Rules provide the Trial Chambers with a wide of discretion in determining the
                    sentence and in considering factors in aggravation.
                    In the view of the Appeals Chamber, verbal abuse can be taken into account as an aggravating factor
                    by Trial Chambers.

162.    As to the issue of whether verbal abuse by one of the members of the
                    Milan Lukić
                    group may aggravate the Appellant’s sentence, the Appeals Chamber finds that, regardless of who made
                    it,
                    verbal abuse aggravated the gravity of the crimes committed on the bank of the Drina River.
                    The Appellant took part in these crimes and the Trial Chamber correctly found that verbal abuse made
                    in these circumstances amounted to an aggravating factor.
                    The Appeals Chamber finds that the Appellant has not demonstrated that the Trial Chamber committed
                    an error in exercising its discretion.
                    Therefore, this sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
(c) The trauma suffered cannot be an aggravating factor since it is an element of the crime

163.    The Appellant argues that the trauma suffered by the victims cannot
                    amount to an aggravating factor since
                    the trauma is an element of inhumane acts as a crime against humanity pursuant Article 5(i) of the
                    Statute. He submits that as an element of the crime, the trauma can not be taken into account additionally as
                    aggravating the act.

164.    The Prosecution responds that the long-term trauma suffered by the
                    victims is not,
                    as such, an element of the crime of persecution or murder as a crime against humanity or of murder
                    as a war crime. 

165.    In the present case, when recalling the applicable law in Chapter XI of
                    the Judgement on inhumane acts, the Trial Chamber held that:







The elements to be proved [for an act to
                            constitute an inhumane act as a crime against humanity] are:
- 
the occurrence of an act or omission of similar seriousness to the other enumerated acts
                                under the Article;- 
the act or omission caused serious mental or physical suffering or injury or constituted
                                a serious attack of human dignity;- 
the act or omission was performed deliberately by the accused or a person or persons for
                                whose acts and omissions he bears criminal responsibility. 

To assess the seriousness of an act, consideration must be given to all the
                            factual circumstances.
                            These circumstances may include the nature of the act or omission, the context in which it
                            occurred,
                            the personal circumstances of the victim including age, sex and health, as well as the
                            physical,
                            mental and moral effects of the act upon the victim. While there is no requirement that the
                            suffering
                            imposed by the act have long term effects on the victim, the fact that an act has had long
                            term effects may be relevant to the determination of the seriousness of the act. 



166.    The Trial Chamber was satisfied that “the attempted murder of VG-32 and
                    VG-14 constitutes a serious attack on their human dignity,
                    and that it caused VG-32 and VG-14 immeasurable mental suffering”. Considering the aggravating factors argued by the Prosecution,
                    the Trial Chamber found that “the trauma still suffered by the survivors of the shooting”
                    constituted an aggravating factor. 

167.    The Appeals Chamber is of the view that, even if the mental suffering of
                    the survivors of
                    the Drina River constitutes an element of the crime of inhumane acts,
                    the Trial Chamber was entitled to take the long term effect of the trauma still suffered by
                    witnesses VG-14 and VG-32 into account as an aggravating factor.
                    Therefore, the Appellant has not demonstrated that the Trial Chamber erred in the exercise of its
                    discretion.
                    This sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
(d) Discriminatory state of mind

168.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber committed an error of law
                    by finding that his discriminatory
                    state of mind was an aggravating factor in relation to the murders as a violation of the laws or
                    customs of war under Article 3
                    of the Statute because the crime of persecution as a crime against humanity under Article 5(h) of
                    the Statute already includes this element. Such application, he argues, violates the principlenon bis in idem. 

169.    The Prosecution submits that the rules on the permissibility of
                    cumulative convictions allow convictions under Articles 3 and 5
                    of the Statute based on the same conduct on the basis that each crime contains an element which the
                    other does not.
                    Therefore, in the submission of the Prosecution, it is within the discretion of the Trial Chamber to
                    consider a factor in aggravation under Article 3
                    even if the same factor cannot be considered in aggravation for the crime of persecution. 

170.    The Appellant was convicted only for his conduct in relation to the
                    Drina River incident.
                    The Trial Chamber found when discussing cumulative convictions that







[c]onvictions for the crimes enumerated under Articles 3 and 5
                                of the Statute based on the same conduct are permissible, as each contains a materially
                                distinct element.
                                The materially distinct element required by Article 3 is the requirement that there be a
                                close link between the acts of the accused and the armed conflict.
                                That required by Article 5 offences is that the offence be committed within the context
                                of a widespread of systematic attack directed against a civilian population.
                                Applying this test to the present case, convictions for murder as a violation of the
                                laws or customs of war and any other crime charged
                                under Article 5 of the Statute based on the same conduct are permissible. Whenever
                                cumulative convictions under both Article 3 and Article 5
                                of the Statute is based on the same conduct, the Trial Chamber must ensure that the
                                final or aggregate sentence reflects
                                the totality of the criminal conduct and overall culpability of the offender. 



171.    When discussing the sentence, the Trial Chamber found that
                    a discriminatory state of mind may constitute an aggravating factor when it is not an element of the
                    crime in question. In paragraph 277 of the Judgement, the Trial Chamber held that a discriminatory
                    state of mind is an element of the crime of persecution pursuant to Article 5(h) of the Statute and
                    “may not additionally aggravate that offence.” In paragraph 278, however, the Trial Chamber held
                    that a discriminatory state of mind may be used in aggravation in relation to offences for which it
                    is not required as an element and accepted that, in relation to the conviction for murder pursuant
                    to Article 3 of the Statute, the Appellant’s discriminatory state of mind does constitute an
                    aggravating factor.

172.    Several questions arise before the Appeals Chamber. The
                    first issue is whether discriminatory intent can be used as an aggravating factor. To that question
                    the answer is in the affirmative. The Appeals Chamber has already held in the Kunarac Appeals
                    Judgement that





it is alleged that the Trial Chamber erred in regarding the discriminatory objective as an
                            aggravating factor, as this constitutes an element of Article 5 crimes. In this context, the
                            Appeals Chamber recalls the Tadić Appeal Judgement, which states that a discriminatory
                            intent “is an indispensable legal ingredient of the offence only with regards to those
                            crimes for which this is expressly required, that is, for Article 5(h) of the Statute,
                            concerning various types of persecution.” It is not an element for other offences enumerated
                            in Article 5 of the Statute. 





The Prosecution submitted and the Appeals Chamber agrees that “[t]here is a sound
                    reason why the Trial Chamber mentioned discriminatory intent as an aggravating factor for the war
                    crime of murder despite the fact that it cannot aggravate the global sentence. The reason is that
                    every conviction should stand on its own. Consequently, aggravating circumstances must be considered
                    for every crime separately. As discriminatory intent is an aggravating circumstance for the war
                    crime of murder the Trial Chamber had
                    to regard this fact.” 

173.    The Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber did not
                    err in holding that “a discriminatory state of mind may however be regarded as an aggravating factor
                    in relation to offences for which such a state of mind is not an element.” A discriminatory state of mind is not an element of the crime of murder under Article 3 of the
                    Statute and was not therefore taken into account in convicting the Appellant for the crime of
                    murder. It could however be taken into account in estimating the gravity of the murder. This is the
                    way the Trial Chamber used it. The discriminatory state of mind was used once in order to assess the
                    gravity of the crime of murder and, of course on another occasion, in order to
                    establish that the Appellant had the requisite discriminatory intent of the crime of persecution.
                    The Trial


                    274 Judgement, para. 266.


                    Chamber committed no error in holding that a discriminatory state of mind can be regarded as an
                    aggravating factor in relation to the crime of murder. This sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
3. Alleged errors relating to mitigating factors

174.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in
                    failing to consider as a mitigating factor the remorse shown by him after the incident and his
                    co-operation with the Prosecution.
(a) The Appellant’s remorse

175.    The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred by finding that he
                    had not shown any remorse for his participation in the killing of the five Muslim men, including his
                    friend Meho D`afić, that were killed on the bank of the Drina River. The Appellant submits that he expressed his remorse for the death of the five men in the statement
                    he gave to the investigators of the Prosecution and during the trial, and he refers to the testimony
                    of witness Milojka Vasiljević. However, the Appellant argues that he could not express remorse for
                    his “participation in the killing” since he considers that he did not participate in the killing. Further, the Appellant argues
                    that the Trial Chamber erred by not accepting his testimony that he reported the killing to the
                    Chief of Police, Mr. Tomić, who was killed a short time later. The Trial Chamber did not accept the
                    Appellant’s testimony and failed to address the testimony of his wife Milojka Vasiljević. The Prosecution submits
                    that the Appellant did not identify any specific error in the Trial Chamber’s finding and did not
                    establish that this finding was unreasonable. 

176.    The Trial Chamber found that it was not satisfied that the
                    Appellant “showed any remorse for his participation in the deaths of the five men, even though one
                    of the victims was a person well known to him. Nor does the Trial Chamber accept the Accused’s
                    evidence that, on the day after the Drina River incident, he went to the police to report the
                    killing.” 

177.    Previous case-law from the Trial Chambers of the Tribunals
                    states that in order for remorse to be considered as a mitigating factor it has to be sincere. The Appeals Chamber is of the view that an accused can express sincere regrets without admitting his
                    participation in a crime, and that that is a factor which may be taken into account. The Trial
                    Chamber considered a number of factors put forward by the


                    Appellant as mitigating circumstances, including his repentance or remorse. In the Trial Chamber’s finding that the Appellant did not show any remorse for his participation in
                    the Drina River incident, the Appeals Chamber understands that the Trial Chamber exercised its own
                    discretion in deciding that the words used by the Appellant did not show real remorse and could not
                    therefore be considered as a mitigating circumstance. The Appellant has not shown that the Trial
                    Chamber committed any error in the exercise of its discretion.

178.    Similarly, the Appellant has not shown any error committed
                    by the Trial Chamber when it rejected the Appellant’s evidence that, on the day of the Drina River
                    incident, he went to the police to report the killings. The view of the Appeals Chamber is that, in
                    rejecting the Appellant’s testimony on this point, the Trial Chamber is to be understood as
                    necessarily also having considered the evidence of others to the same effect. This sub-ground of
                    appeal is, therefore, dismissed.
(b) Co-operation with the Prosecution

179.    The Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding that his
                    co-operation with the Prosecution was not “substantial co-operation” within the meaning of Rule
                    101(B)(ii) of the Rules and therefore was not considered as a mitigating factor. The Appellant submits that he willingly gave a statement to the Prosecution in November 2000 and
                    that he told the Prosecution everything he knew. The Appellant argues that the fact that he provided
                    more information than other witnesses is an indication that his co- operation was substantial. The Prosecution submits that the Appellant does not show any discernible error in the exercise of
                    the Trial Chamber’s discretion in this respect. 

180.    Co-operation with the Prosecution is the only mitigating
                    factor that Trial Chambers are specifically required to consider pursuant to Rule 101 (B)(ii) of the
                    Rules. The Trial Chamber did not accept the Appellant’s co-operation with the Prosecution as substantial
                    but it did accept his co-operation as modest and gave it some, albeit very little, weight in
                    mitigation. The Appeals Chamber therefore


                    finds that the Appellant has not shown a discernable error in the exercise of the Trial Chamber’s
                    discretion. This sub-ground of appeal is dismissed.
B. The Appeals Chamber’s considerations

181.    The Trial Chamber imposed a prison sentence of twenty years
                    on the Appellant. The Appeals Chamber has not found in favour of any of the Appellant’s alleged
                    errors in relation to the sentence. However, the Appeals Chamber is of the view that the sentence
                    needs to be adjusted due to the Appeals Chamber’s finding that the Appellant was responsible as an
                    aider and abettor with respect to murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war under Article
                    3 of the Statute (Count 5) and persecution by way of murder and inhumane acts as a crime against
                    humanity pursuant to Article 5(h) of the Statute (Count 3), instead of being responsible as a
                    co-perpetrator as was found by the Trial Chamber. The Appeals Chamber considers that it has the
                    mandate to revise the sentence by itself without remitting it to
                    the Trial Chamber. 

182.    The Appeals Chamber is of the view that aiding and abetting
                    is a form of responsibility which generally warrants a lower sentence than is appropriate to
                    responsibility as a co-perpetrator. The Appeals Chamber recalls that the sentence to be imposed must reflect the inherent gravity of the
                    criminal conduct of an accused. The Appeals Chamber is of the view that the Appellant committed very
                    serious crimes. Therefore, taking into account the particular circumstances of this case as well as
                    the form and degree of the participation of the Appellant in the crimes, the Appeals Chamber finds
                    that a sentence of
                    15 years is appropriate.
VII. Disposition

For the foregoing reasons,THE APPEALS CHAMBER

PURSUANTto Article 25 of the Statute and Rules 117 and 188 of the Rules of
                    Procedure and

                    Evidence;

NOTINGthe respective written submissions of the parties and the arguments they
                    presented at the hearing of 18 November 2013;

SITTINGin open session;

ALLOWS, Judge Shahabuddeen dissenting, Mitar Vasiljević’s appeal in so far as
                    it relates to his convictions as a co-perpetrator of persecution, a crime against humanity (murder
                    and inhumane acts) under Count 3 of the Indictment, and of murder, a violation of the laws or
                    customs of war, under Count 5 of the Indictment;

SETS ASIDE, Judge Shahabuddeen dissenting, these convictions, and FINDS, Judge
                    Shahabuddeen dissenting, Mitar Vasiljević guilty of Counts 3 and 5 of the Indictment as an aider and
                    abettor to persecution, a crime against humanity (murder and inhumane acts), and as an aider and
                    abettor to murder, a violation of the laws or customs of war, pursuant to Article 7(1) of the
                    Statute;

DISMISSESMitar Vasiljević’s appeal against convictions in all other respects;

DISMISSESMitar Vasiljević’s appeal against sentence and IMPOSES, Judge
                    Shahabuddeen dissenting, a new sentence, taking into account his responsibility established on the
                    basis of the new convictions entered on appeal;

SENTENCESMitar Vasiljević to fifteen years’ imprisonment to run as of this
                    day, subject to credit being given under Rule 101(C) of the Rules for the period Mitar Vasiljević
                    has already spent in detention, that is from 25 January 2000 to the present day;

ORDERS, in accordance with Rule 103(C) and 107 of the Rules of Procedure and
                    Evidence, that Mitar Vasiljević is to remain in the custody of the International Tribunal pending
                    the finalisation of arrangements for his transfer to the State where his sentence will be served.





Done in English and French, the English text being authoritative.





Judge Theodor Meron (Presiding)      Judge Mohamed
                    Shahabuddeen      Judge Mehmet Güney



Judge Wolfgang Schomburg      Judge Inés Mónica Weinberg de
                    Roca





Judge Mohamed Shahabuddeen appends a separate and dissenting opinion to this
                    Judgment.





Dated this twenty-fifth day of February 2004

At The Hague,

The Netherlands.






VIII. SEPARATE AND DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE
                        SHAHABUDDEEN
A. Preliminary

1.     Seven men were lined up on the bank of the Drina River; they
                    were made to face the river; they were unarmed civilians. Then, five to six metres behind them,
                    another group lined up; it was armed; it included the appellant. This group shot in the direction of
                    the seven men. Five of these were killed; they fell into the river. Pretending to have been shot,
                    the two others also fell into the river; they lived to tell the tale.

2.    The Trial Chamber was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt
                    that the appellant himself had killed anyone. Nevertheless, on the theory of joint criminal
                    enterprise, it convicted him of murder as a co- perpetrator.

3.    I agree with the Appeals Chamber that the appellant had
                    criminal responsibility. Where I differ is on the question of the level of that responsibility. The
                    Appeals Chamber substitutes a conviction for aiding and abetting murder for the conviction for
                    murder as a co-perpetrator which was imposed by the Trial Chamber. The Trial Chamber’s conviction
                    for persecution, as a co-perpetrator, through murder of the five victims and inhumane acts inflicted
                    on the remaining two has likewise been revised to one of aiding and abetting persecution.

4.    With respect, I consider that the Trial Chamber was right.
                    These are my reasons.
B. Background

5.    In the territory concerned, ethnic cleansing was in progress.
                    In the context of that phenomenon, an attack took place in the municipality of Višegrad. In the
                    words of the Trial Chamber:



The attack took many forms, starting with the Serb take-over of the town and the systematic and
                        large-scale criminal campaign of murders, rapes and mistreatment of the non-Serb population of
                        this municipality, particularly the Muslims, which eventually culminated in one of the most
                        comprehensive and ruthless campaigns of ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian conflict. Within a few
                        weeks, the municipality of Višegrad was almost completely cleansed of its non-Serb citizens,
                        …. 

A previous Muslim majority had disappeared; indeed, “by the end of 1992, there were
                    very few non- Serbs left in Višegrad.” In paragraph 56 of its judgment, the Trial Chamber found that “proportionally the changes in
                    Višegrad were second only to those which occurred in Srebrenica.”

6.    Ethnic cleansing was carried out, inter alia, by paramilitary
                    groups. One of these was Milan Lukić’s group. Local residents called it the “White Eagles”. In the
                    words of the Trial Chamber, the White Eagles was a “particularly violent and feared group of Serb
                    paramilitaries.” According
                    to paragraph 75 of its judgment, Lukić and most of his associates had not lived in Višegrad for some
                    time; consequently, they sought the assistance of local Serbs to help them identify the targets of
                    their crimes.

7.    The appellant was a Serb resident in Višegrad; he had been
                    there all the time. The Trial Chamber found that “in view of the sheer scale and systematic nature
                    of the attack, the Accused must have noticed the consequences of this campaign upon the non-Serb
                    civilian population of the Višegrad municipality.” In its turn, the Appeals Chamber said “that a reasonable Trial Chamber could conclude from the above
                    that the Appellant knew about the on-going attack against the Muslim civilian population in
                    Višegrad.” 

8.    Further, the appellant was in a kum relationship – a strong
                    Serbian family bond – with Lukić. The Trial Chamber was “satisfied … that, because of his close relationship with Milan Lukić, the
                    Accused was a ready source of local information for the group about the location of Muslims in the
                    area of Višegrad, and that he gave that information to the group with the full realisation that it
                    would be used to persecute Muslims.” The Appeals Chamber rejected the finding of the Trial Chamber that he was acting as an informant to
                    the Lukić group. Also, the Appeals Chamber accepted the Trial Chamber’s finding that it was not satisfied that the
                    appellant was a member of Lukić’s paramilitary group or “that
                    his association with that group was such that it is possible to draw an inference beyond reasonable
                    doubt that [he] shared the general homicidal intentions of that group.” The question, however, is whether the appellant shared the homicidal intentions of Lukić’s group on
                    the particular occasion involved in this case.

9.    The Trial Chamber found that, on the afternoon of 7 June
                    1992, Milan Lukić and two other unidentified men forcibly detained seven Muslim men and took them by
                    two motor cars to Vilina Vlas Hotel in Višegradska Banja. That hotel was accepted by the parties as
                    the headquarters of Lukić’s paramilitary group. Throughout the entire incident involved in this case
                    Lukić carried a sniper rifle with a silencer, while the two other men each carried an automatic
                    rifle. At the hotel, they were
                    joined by the appellant, who was already there. The Trial Chamber rejected his claim that he did not
                    have a gun there; the Appeals Chamber agreed that he had a gun when he left the hotel. 

10.    At the hotel, Lukić tried unsuccessfully to find some keys.
                    Eventually, on his orders, the group (including the appellant) entered the cars. After a short
                    drive, the cars stopped at a place called Sase, adjoining the killing field.
C. Intent of the appellant before arriving at Sase

11.    The appellant’s case is that, until the cars arrived at
                    Sase, he had been under the impression that the seven Muslim men were to be exchanged. When the cars
                    stopped at Sase, he realised that this was not to be – that the men were to be killed. The Trial
                    Chamber found against that claim to late discovery of the true purpose in view. It said that it was
                    “satisfied that, when the Accused left the Vilina Vlas Hotel, he knew that the men were not to be
                    exchanged but were to be killed.” The Appeals Chamber disagrees; it states that it would not be reasonable to conclude “that the
                    Appellant knew when he left the hotel that the seven Muslim men were going to be killed and not
                    exchanged.” I have difficulty with this finding.

12.    The Appeals Chamber “takes into consideration [that].… iii)
                    witness VG-32 testified that it was from the moment Milan Lukić ordered them to leave the car [i.e.,
                    at Sase] that the behaviour of the
                    soldiers changed drastically.” The reference to “the soldiers” was a reference to the captors, including
                    the appellant. I understand that excerpt to mean that the Appeals Chamber considered that the
                    appellant did not expect that change. So, the evidence may be consulted. The Appeals Chamber refers
                    to the


                    evidence of witness VG-32 in footnote 220 of its judgment. As recorded in the transcript of the
                    Trial

                    Chamber, at p. 274, the evidence of that witness reads:



A … We stopped behind them [i.e., the other car] and we were ordered to go out. The moment we
                        got out – at the moment we got out and stood in the road, on the left-hand side, the behaviour
                        of the soldier changed drastically.Q. When you say “changed drastically,” would you describe his demeanour or behaviour now at this
                        stage?A. I’m sorry, I don’t know who you are referring to. Are you referring to everyone or to
                        individuals?Q. You just referred to a soldier whose behaviour changed drastically. Which soldier are you
                        referring to?A. I meant everybody. I meant all four of them, actually, who were present there. Q. Would you
                        please describe how their behaviour changed?A. I said that the soldier who was sitting in the car as we were driving back from the hotel
                        offered us cigarettes. He talked to us very nicely. But the moment we got out of the car, they
                        stepped back. They moved a few metres to the side, and their weapons were on the ready, and they
                        spoke to us very harshly. They used very harsh words to order us to walk in the direction of the
                        river.Q. I want to ask you – you said they had their weapons “on the ready.” What exactly do you mean
                        by that?A. I mean that the weapons were pointed at us, and of course the rifles had their safeties off.

13.    On allegedly learning for the first time at Sase that the
                    men were to be killed, the appellant did not protest or in any other way demonstrate surprise or
                    dissatisfaction. Asked, in effect, “whose behaviour changed drastically,” the witness replied: “I
                    meant everybody. I meant all four of them, actually, who were present there.” That included the
                    appellant; so he changed his behaviour too. He was fully identified with the other members of the
                    captor group; he was not, as the captives were, an unprepared spectator of the change. Certainly,
                    the previous behaviour of the captors appeared to have changed, and that apparent change in
                    behaviour could indeed have taken the captives by surprise, but not the appellant.

14.    An obvious reflection – not requiring evidence – is that,
                    for ease of security, the captors would not tell the captives of their impending doom while the cars
                    were on the move. However, the real purpose of their mission would of necessity be laid bare when
                    they reached the killing field. So, the fact that the captives were earlier told that they were
                    being taken to be exchanged did not reasonably imply that the appellant himself believed that or
                    that he was taken by surprise by the contrary disclosure at the killing field. There is no
                    suggestion that at that point his conduct differed from that of his colleagues. His actions were
                    those of a killer who knew all along what fate would befall the captives.

15.    In effect, the fact that the appellant did not show any
                    surprise in reaction to the disclosure at Sase that the captives were to be killed can be taken into
                    account in determining whether a reasonable tribunal of fact could have found, as the Trial Chamber
                    did, that before the cars arrived at Sase the appellant knew that the intention was to kill the
                    captives. Thus, even if an inference to this effect cannot be grounded on the particular matter
                    mentioned by the Trial Chamber concerning the Varda factory, the appellant’s behaviour at Sase was itself material which justified that finding by the Trial
                    Chamber. The above-mentioned transcript was referred to by the Appeals Chamber ex mero motu in the belief that the drastic change which it mentioned
                    undermined the finding of the Trial Chamber; in my view, the transcript supports the finding of the
                    Trial Chamber and has to be considered by the Appeals Chamber. Evidence before a Trial Chamber is
                    notoriously voluminous: a Trial Chamber cannot be expected to refer to all of it. It is good law
                    that the Appeals Chamber has to presume that all relevant evidence was taken into consideration by
                    the Trial Chamber even if not expressly referred to by it. 

16.    In brief, the material on record does not enable the Appeals
                    Chamber to say that no reasonable tribunal of fact could have come to the conclusion reached by the
                    Trial Chamber “that, when the Accused left the Vilina Vlas Hotel, he knew that the men were not to
                    be exchanged but were to be killed.” Therefore, the Appeals Chamber cannot disturb the Trial Chamber’s finding on that point.
D. Intent of the appellant after arriving at Sase

17.    In any event, as the Appeals Chamber recalls, at the time
                    when the cars parked at Sase, “the Appellant admits that he knew that the seven Muslim men were to
                    be killed.” Thus, if he did not know of the intent before, he knew of it then. Did he also share the intent? The
                    shortness of time which elapsed between the arrival at Sase and the killing on the bank of the Drina
                    River is not decisive. What is decisive is the evidence of what happened between the arrival at Sase
                    and the time when the killings took place.

18.    In this respect, paragraph 104 of the judgment of the Trial
                    Chamber states:



[T]he seven Muslim men were instructed to get out of the cars and ordered by Milan Lukić to walk
                        through a field towards the bank of the Drina River, which was 100 metres away. The Trial
                        Chamber is satisfied that they were forced to walk at gunpoint towards the River. The Trial
                        Chamber is satisfied that the seven Muslim men were told that they would be killed if they tried
                        to escape.

Thus, from where the cars were parked, the appellant walked 100 metres through a field
                    to the river bank, his gun pointed at the captives with its safety catches off. Since he now knew
                    that the captives were to be killed, he could not claim that he was barring escape to ensure
                    availability for exchange. He was demonstrating willingness to participate in the imminent act of
                    killing.

19.    The appellant claimed that, during that walk, he pleaded
                    with Lukić to spare the men. The Trial Chamber rejected the claim. The Appeals Chamber agreed with
                    the Trial Chamber. The Trial Chamber was “satisfied that some of the Muslim men begged for their lives and that their
                    pleas were ignored;” it found
                    that, contrary to his claim, the appellant “said nothing in response to the pleas of” one of the
                    victims. That the appellant in
                    fact remained both armed and silent before the victims’ pleas for their lives suggests that he did
                    more than know of the intent to kill. This conclusion is reinforced by
                    what follows.
E. The appellant, with his gun, stood in line with other
                        members of the firing party at the time of the shooting

20.    Before the Trial Chamber, the appellant claimed that he “was
                    standing 10 to 15 meters behind those seven men, between the trees …” ,
                    that he was “left behind among the trees,” and that “he stayed behind in the bushes.” The Trial Chamber dismissed these claims, stating:



The Trial Chamber is satisfied that Milan Lukić, the Accused and the two unidentified men
                        pointed their guns, which had their safety catches off, at the Muslim men, as they walked
                        towards the bank of the Drina River. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that the Accused followed
                        the men to the banks of the Drina River, and it rejects as untruthful the Accused’s evidence
                        that, when he realised that he could not persuade Milan Lukić to spare the men, he turned away
                        from the group
                        and stopped some 10 to 15 metres from the river. 

21.    Thus, the Trial Chamber had before it the appellant’s
                    contention that he had turned away from the group and had stopped some distance away – that, in
                    effect, he had dissociated himself from the killings. With some dismay, the Trial Chamber rejected
                    that claim as “untruthful,” as it likewise dismissed the appellant’s related claim that he reported the matter to the police on
                    the following day. These decisions were accepted by the Appeals Chamber, which specifically said that it “dismisses the

                    Appellant’s alleged errors regarding … (iii) the finding of fact that the Appellant was standing
                    some distance away from the group during the shooting.” The Appeals Chamber also accepted that the appellant had a gun at the Drina River, contrary to the
                    appellant’s denial. 

22.    Then, as to what happened when the party reached the river
                    bank, the Trial Chamber made this finding: 



The Trial Chamber is satisfied that, when they reached the bank of the river, the seven Muslim
                        men were lined up facing the river, and that Milan Lukić, the Accused and the other two
                        unidentified men lined up approximately five to six metres behind the Muslim men.

After considering certain discrepancies in the evidence, the Trial Chamber likewise
                    said that it was
                    “satisfied that all four men stood behind the seven Muslims and that the accused was one of them.” 

23.    In effect, the appellant stood with the other members of the
                    firing party. According to the Trial Chamber, they had all “lined up”. That means that the appellant
                    stood in line with the other offenders; and he was armed. The Trial Chamber used the words “shortly
                    before” in stating that the Accused was “standing behind the Muslim men with his gun together with
                    the other three offenders shortly before the shooting started,” but it is not credible that the formation which existed “shortly before the shooting started” had
                    lost a member just before the shooting started. This was not the understanding of the Trial
                    Chamber when it stated “that it has been established beyond reasonable doubt that the Accused
                    participated in the shooting and that he did so sharing the intention of the others in the group
                    that the seven Bosnian men be killed.” Nor was it the understanding of the Appeals Chamber when it dismissed the appellant’s claim that he
                    “was standing some distance away from the group during the shooting.” Thus, at the time of the shooting, the appellant was standing armed and in line with his colleagues
                    as a member of the firing party.

24.    The appellant told lies to the Trial Chamber about not being
                    armed at the hotel, about not being armed at the Drina River, about responding to the pleas of the
                    victims, about asking Lukić to spare their lives, about being some distance away from the actual
                    shooting, and about reporting the matter to the police station on the following day. As lies can be
                    told by an accused for reasons which do not necessarily imply guilt, it is a forbidden line of
                    reasoning that the telling of lies demonstrates guilt. But that reasoning may be employed where the court is satisfied that the lies (whether told in court
                    or out

                    of court) were told from a consciousness of guilt, provided they are not the only basis of
                    conviction. In my opinion, the lies told by the appellant fall into this category. They show that he
                    was seeking to evade


                    his criminal responsibility as one of the main actors; they therefore imply an acknowledgment of
                    that responsibility. The responsibility of a main actor which was thus acknowledged was that of a
                    co- perpetrator – and not that of a lesser actor such as an aider and abettor.
F. The Trial Chamber’s finding that there was no sufficient
                        proof of any actual killing by the appellant

25.    However, as it stated in paragraph 113 of its judgment, the
                    Trial Chamber was “not satisfied that it has been established that the accused actually killed
                    anyone or
                    more of the victims”. Its views are as follows: 



112. The Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the Prosecution has established beyond reasonable
                        doubt that the Accused fired his weapon at the same time as the other three, or that he
                        personally killed anyone or more of the victims. VG-32 gave evidence that, immediately before
                        the shooting started, he heard three clicks, which were produced by the specific devices of the
                        automatic rifles of the Accused and the two other unidentified men. VG-32 said that, by
                        adjusting those devices, the method of shooting was adjusted from bursts of gunfire to
                        individual shots. Milan Lukić’s sniper rifle did not have such device. VG-14 gave evidence that
                        the first sequence of shots consisted of three loud shots and one “bluff” or muted shot. He
                        specified that the three loud shots came from the automatic rifles of the Accused and of the
                        other two unidentified men, and that the “bluff” shot came from Milan Lukić’s sniper rifle,
                        which had a silencer. Because of the extraordinarily tense situation in which they were at the
                        time, the evidence given by VG-32 and VG-14 that they remembered the number of shots fired is
                        not sufficiently reliable to base a finding beyond reasonable doubt on that evidence only that
                        the Accused actually pulled the trigger. Even the most honest witnesses can convince themselves
                        of what must have happened by a perfectly natural process of unconscious reconstruction. The
                        Trial Chamber accepts that these two witnesses honestly believed that this is what happened, but
                        it cannot exclude the very understandable and natural possibility that they have unconsciously
                        reconstructed it.113. Although the Trial Chamber is not satisfied that it has been established that the Accused
                        actually killed anyone or more of the victims, it is nevertheless satisfied that the only
                        reasonable inference available on the evidence is that the Accused, by his actions, intended
                        that the seven Muslim men be killed, whether or not he actually carried out any of those
                        killings himself. One member of the Trial Chamber accepts the evidence relating to the number of
                        clicks, although this

                        evidence is not regarded by that Judge as essential or necessary to the determination of the
                        accused’s intention. The majority has no doubt that VG-32 honestly believed that he heard three
                        clicks, but the majority is not satisfied that there is no element of perfectly natural
                        reconstruction involved in that belief. The majority of the Trial Chambers makes an identical
                        finding in relation to the evidence of VG-14 concerning the number of shots and the nature of
                        the noise produced by the weapons being fired. The conclusion of all three members of the Trial
                        Chamber in relation to the intent of the Accused that those seven men be killed is thus
                        identical.

26.    The finding by the Trial Chamber that it was “not satisfied
                    that it has been established that the accused actually killed anyone or more of the victims” is not
                    the same as a finding – and the Trial Chamber did not find - that the accused had withdrawn from the intent of the group to kill, which, in my view and in the view of the Trial Chamber, he
                    shared. More importantly, as the above excerpts show, that holding was not made on evidence solely
                    applicable to the accused: it could apply to any of the offenders. The holding reflected the simple
                    fact that it is evidentially difficult – although not impossible
                    - to establish that a particular member of a firing party actually pulled his trigger or that, if he
                    did, he actually killed any of a number of victims: they might have been killed by other members of
                    the firing party.

27.    The resulting situation is not unknown to the law. It is
                    usually solved by saying that, if a person is a party to a joint criminal enterprise (by whatever
                    name called), he is a co-perpetrator of the ensuing crime, although it is not shown that he took
                    part in the actual killing. That was the approach taken by the Trial Chamber. 
G. The argument that the appellant lacked power to prevent the
                        commission of the crime

28.    However, an objection of substance to that approach has been
                    raised by co-counsel for the appellant. As I understand it, his submission is this: The doctrine of joint criminal enterprise is accepted.
                    But, in judging whether a person was a participant in a joint criminal enterprise, it must be
                    found that his participation was substantial. Substantial participation means that the person must
                    be


                    shown to be “in a position with power to prevent the work of the joint criminal enterprise and the
                    corresponding criminal activity.” The appellant was not in that position, because the evidence showed that he “was not in a position
                    to stop Mr Lukić and his men from committing their crimes.” Therefore, he could not have criminal responsibility as a co-perpetrator.

29.    I believe that the submission is based on the following
                    argument. The leading principle, as recognised in Tadić, is that “the foundation of criminal
                    responsibility is the principle of personal culpability.” An accused does not engage criminal responsibility as the perpetrator of a crime unless he was in
                    control of the commission of the crime. A person is in control of the commission of a joint criminal
                    enterprise crime only if his contribution was indispensable to its commission, in the sense that
                    non-fulfilment of his part of the enterprise would have ruined the efforts of his colleagues to
                    commit the crime. If he is regarded as culpable as a co-perpetrator of the crime although it could have been committed
                    without his participation in that sense, this can only be because his culpability as a co-
                    perpetrator derives from that of the real actor: the culpability of the latter as a perpetrator is
                    being imputed to the former. That is not the same as saying that an accused should only be culpable
                    for what he himself has done. Consequently, runs the argument, where the act of the
                    accused does not rise to the level of control over the commission of the crime, his culpability is
                    not that of a co-perpetrator.

30.    Tadić goes beyond that argument, for there the Appeals
                    Chamber recalled, with evident approval, the charge of Judge Advocate Honig in the Ponzano case that
                    it was not necessary to show that the defendant’s participation was a sine qua non, “or that the
                    offence would not have occurred but for his participation.” So, if Tadić is wrong on that point, it could be argued that the appellant in this case was not in
                    control of the commission of the crime of murder because the actual killing was done by others and
                    his non-contribution did not ruin their efforts to commit the crime. More specifically, the
                    appellant


                    claimed that the power to make decisions rested with Lukić and that he was incapable of influencing
                    Lukić. Thus, the appellant lacked power to prevent the commission of the crime by his colleagues.
                    The result is that he was not guilty, as co-perpetrator, of the murder committed by them.

31.    This is not a case in which it is said that the act was the
                    act of the appellant because it was done on his behalf by an innocent agent used as his instrument.
                    It is therefore not necessary to consider the matter from the point of view appropriate to a
                    situation in which it turns out that the allegedly “innocent” agent himself intended the crime – a
                    situation in which the accused might be held to be guilty only as an aider and abettor. Here, what is said is that the appellant was a party to a joint criminal enterprise to commit the
                    crime. One party to such an enterprise is not acting as the agent of another – at least, not in the
                    ordinary sense. All the parties are acting together to achieve an agreed result. In acting together,
                    they are really acting as one. On this basis, the acts of each are the acts of all.

32.    Transposing this model to this case, one may say that the
                    other offenders acted pursuant to an understanding to which the appellant was an active party at the
                    time of the commission of the act. In performing the act, they were of course carrying out their own
                    will, but they were also carrying out his will under that understanding. The perspective is
                    important. The focus is not on whether he had power to prevent them from acting as they did; the
                    focus is on whether, even if he could not prevent them from acting as they did, he could have
                    withheld his will and thereby prevented their act from being regarded as having been done pursuant
                    to his own will also.

33.    Participation has of course to be real; courts can determine
                    whether it is. What gives rise to difficulty is the proposition that a person must be shown to have
                    had power to prevent the activity of a joint criminal enterprise from being accomplished before he
                    can be held to have been a real participant in the enterprise. He might have been playing a
                    subordinate role in the enterprise and might have had no power to prevent its activity from being
                    accomplished; he could still have been participating. Examples could be easily found. The degree of
                    participation goes to sentence, not to guilt.

34.    In sum, even if Lukić’s personality was the dominant one, it
                    does not follow that the appellant had no will of his own. The Appeals Chamber does not say that; it
                    dismissed a defence of duress. The appellant exercised his will when he joined the joint criminal enterprise led by Lukić, whom he
                    had previously known. Under the joint criminal enterprise, his colleagues were acting pursuant to
                    his will, as well as their own, when they committed the crime; thereupon, the crime became his crime
                    also. Accordingly, his conviction as a co-perpetrator of the murders committed by them satisfied the
                    leading principle that “the foundation of criminal responsibility is the principle of personal
                    culpability.” 

35.    Finally, it may be observed that the appellant’s submission
                    that the decision-making power lay with Lukić exclusively was dismissed by the Trial Chamber when it
                    said that it “rejects the evidence of the Accused that, in any event, he was powerless to stop Milan
                    Lukić from killing the Muslim men.” The Appeals Chamber does not disagree. Thus, the foundation of co-counsel’s argument fails.
H. The appellant was not an aider and abettor

36.    For the foregoing reasons, no question of aiding and
                    abetting arises. A comparison may be made with the decision of the Supreme Court of Bavaria in
                    Prosecutor v. Djajić. An examination of that case will
                    show that its reasoning is reconcilable with the foregoing.

37.    There, 14 Muslim captives were made to line up on a bridge
                    with their backs to the railing. Opposite to them some soldiers and military police took up
                    positions. There were also some Serbian guards; their position was designed to prevent the Muslims
                    from fleeing and to make it possible to kill them. The guards formed a semicircle; the appellant was somewhere in the middle of the semicircle. He was
                    holding his weapon with both hands in front of his chest like the rest of the guards. The 14
                    Muslim captives were killed. The killing was done by a certain man and by the military police. There
                    was no proof that the killing was done by the guards (including the appellant). The appellant was
                    held to be an aider and abettor, and not a co-perpetrator. The judgment said:



When assessing the overall circumstances, the senate was unable to determine whether the
                        accused’s connection to the killing was so close that his contribution might be considered to be
                        a part of the killing and conversely whether the killing might be considered a consequence of
                        the
                        accused’s part in the crime. 

38.    So, the contrast is between whether the accused’s connection
                    with the killing was so close that his contribution might be considered to be part of the killing
                    and whether the killing might be considered a consequence of the accused’s part in the crime. That
                    is, with respect, a helpful formula. In opting for the lesser conviction, the court said:



The extent of his objective participation in the overall course of the killings was slight.
                        Through his co-operation in the semi-circle of guards, he objectively reduced the defenceless
                        victims’ chance of escaping. However, the accused had no control over the killings, begun by
                        Lazarević and carried out by several marksmen. There were no sure indications either that the
                        accused at least intended to participate in the killings. 

39.    In that case, there were “no sure indications” of intent to
                    participate in the killings. I apprehend that the reason for this is that, inter alia, the court
                    found that, even though he did eventually join the Serbs in the semicircle which was taking shape,
                    “the accused … hung back somewhat when the group of Muslims and the guards walked onto the bridge …” In
                    the instant case, the Trial Chamber dismissed – in its entirety - the defence claim about standing
                    at a distance from the actual shooting, and the Appeals Chamber has upheld that dismissal.

40.    In brief, in Djajić the only function of the accused was to
                    guard the victims to ensure that they were killed by others. In the instant case, the accused
                    guarded the victims but he also took his position with the killers. In standing armed with the
                    killers drawn up in a line at the time of the shooting, and in allowing it to be thought that to all
                    intents and purposes he was one of them, he was demonstrating his willingness to participate in the
                    act of killing rather than his indifference as to whether that act was in
                    fact done or not. In terms of the Djajić test, his “connection to the killing was so close that his

                    contribution might be considered a part of the killing.” Consequently, to adopt and adapt the words
                    of Tadić, to hold him
                    liable only as an aider and abettor might be to understate the degree of his criminal
                    responsibility.

41.    Finally, as mentioned above, a claim of duress has been
                    rightly rejected by the Trial Chamber. The Appeals Chamber has not disturbed this finding, although it did mention “the strong personality
                    of Milan Lukić compared to the Appellant” – a differential situation which often occurs in many a collection of human beings in which
                    leadership is required. Further, it has to be borne in mind that the Appeals Chamber in Erdemović
                    stated that “duress does not afford a complete defence to a soldier charged with a crime against
                    humanity and/or a war crime involving the killing of innocent human beings…;” in such a case, it may be pleaded only in mitigation. It does not operate to reduce a conviction as
                    a co-perpetrator to a conviction as an aider and abettor.
I. Persecution

42.    The Trial Chamber clearly found that the appellant had the
                    requisite intent to discriminate. 355 The Appeals
                    Chamber has not overturned that finding; it has dismissed certain arguments by the appellant on the
                    subject. So
                    the finding of the Trial Chamber that the appellant had the requisite discriminatory intent stands.

43.    The real reason why the Appeals Chamber overturned the
                    persecution conviction was that the offences on which it was founded could not be made out because,
                    in the view of the Appeals Chamber, there was lack of proof of intent to kill. This is mentioned in
                    paragraph 141 of the judgment of the Appeals Chamber which states that in “the absence of this
                    intent [to kill], no reasonable trier of fact could have found the Appellant responsible for
                    committing the crime of persecution by murders and inhumane acts as a co-perpetrator to the joint
                    criminal enterprise.”

44.    Hence, the judgment of the Appeals Chamber on persecution is
                    a sequel to its judgment on murders and inhumane acts: the appellant was not guilty of persecution
                    through offences which could not be proved for want of proof of intent to kill. My opinion being
                    that the appellant had the intent to kill and was thus guilty of those offences, it follows that the
                    conviction for persecution as handed down by
                    the Trial Chamber stands.
J. Conclusion

45.    The Appeals Chamber has not found that any errors of law
                    were committed by the Trial Chamber. The Appeals Chamber considers that the Trial Chamber has
                    committed certain material errors of fact. I respectfully disagree; at any rate, I do not think that
                    it has been demonstrated that no reasonable tribunal of fact could have assessed the relevant
                    evidence differently from the way in which the Trial Chamber assessed it. I would accordingly affirm
                    the judgment of the Trial Chamber that, both on murder and on persecution, the criminal
                    responsibility of the appellant was that of a co-perpetrator and not that of an aider and
                    abettor.



Done in English and in French, the English text being authoritative.



Mohamed Shahabuddeen



Dated 23 January 2014

At The Hague

The Netherlands
IX. ANNEX A: PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Notice of Appeal

183.    On 30 December 2012, in accordance with Rule 108 of the
                    Rules, the Appellant, Mitar
                    Vasiljević, filed his first notice of appeal from the Judgement of 29 November 2012. 

184.    The Prosecution filed a motion regarding defects in the
                    First Notice of Appeal, seeking an order that the Appellant be required to re-file the Notice of
                    Appeal since he did not comply with the requirement of the Rules and the practice Direction. 

185.    On 29 January 2013, the Pre Appeal Judge found that the
                    First Notice of Appeal did not conform to the requirements of Rule 108 of the Rules and that the
                    Appellant had to re-file a notice of appeal within 14 days. 

186.    The Appellant submitted a new Notice of Appeal on 12
                    February 2013. 
B. Briefs filing

187.    On 29 May 2013, the Appellant filed a motion for extension
                    of time, asking for a 14-day extension to submit the Appellant’s Brief. The Prosecution filed its response noting that in the event of the Appellant being granted an
                    extension, the Prosecution would request an extension to file its Respondent’s Brief. On 3 June 2013, the Pre-Appeal Judge ordered the Appellant to file his Appellant’s Brief not later
                    than 24 June 2013 and the Prosecution to file its Respondent’s Brief not later than 18 August
                    2013. 

188.    On 24 June 2013, the Appellant filed the “Defence
                    Appellant’s Brief Against Judgement of

                    November 29, 2012” and an “(Additional) Defence Appeal Brief”.

189.    On 18 July 2013 the Prosecution filed, confidentially, its
                    “Prosecution Respondent’s Brief.” 

190.    On 2 September 2013, the Appellant filed, confidentially,
                    his Reply and an Additional
                    Reply to
                    the Prosecution Response.

191.    On 6 November 2013, noting the Prosecution Response and the
                    Appellant Reply were filed confidentially, the Pre-Appeal Judge ordered the parties to file redacted
                    public versions of the documents. The Prosecution filed the public version of its Response on 7 November 2013 and the Appellant filed
                    the public version of his Reply on the 17 November 2013.
C. Grounds of Appeal

192.    The Appellant has advanced the following eight grounds of
                    appeal against the Trial Chamber’s

Judgment:

193.    The first ground of appeal concerns the Drina River
                    incident. The Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in fact when it concluded that although
                    it was not satisfied that the Appellant actually killed one or more of the victims, it was
                    nevertheless convinced that the only reasonable inference available on the evidence was that the
                    Appellant intended, by his actions, that the seven Muslim men be killed, regardless of whether he
                    carried out any of the murders himself. The Appellant raises three arguments in support of this ground of appeal: i) that he was not armed
                    on the day of the facts; ii) that he was not aware of the homicidal intent of Milan Lukić and his
                    men before they took the seven Muslim men by force to the bank of the Drina River, where he
                    attempted unsuccessfully to dissuade them from carrying out the act; and iii) that he remained at a
                    distance from the armed men when the shooting was taking place. The Prosecution replied that the
                    Appellant in no way demonstrated that the Trial Chamber committed errors occasioning a miscarriage
                    of justice with regard to the Appellant’s criminal responsibility for the Drina River incident. The Prosecution
                    also submitted that, with regard to the first ground, the Appellant in no way satisfied the review
                    criteria on appeal and merely
                    alleged errors in the Trial Chamber’s assessment of the evidence presented at trial, without
                    attempting to


                    demonstrate how its factual findings are unreasonable. The Appellant replied that a reasonable trier would not have accepted the evidence relied on by the
                    Trial Chamber. 

194.    The second ground of appeal concerns the Appellant’s
                    relationship with the paramilitary group led by Milan Lukić. The Appellant analyses Chapter V of the
                    Judgment concerning this relationship and points to five errors of fact pertaining to the Trial
                    Chamber's findings in paragraphs 72, 75-77 and 80 of the Judgment: i) the period in which the group
                    committed its crimes; ii) his alleged
                    role as an informant to the group; iii) the failure to consider the details provided about the group by the Appellant as a sign of his
                    co-operation with the Tribunal; iv) the
                    fact that he did not completely sever his relationship with Milan Lukić following the Drina River
                    incident; and v) the fact that he took part
                    in searching witness VG-59’s father house in Musići. The Prosecution responded that the Appellant’s submissions do not demonstrate that any appealable
                    error of fact was made as he failed to show that no court could have reasonably made the findings
                    that the Trial Chamber did and that the alleged errors occasioned a miscarriage of justice. 

195.    In the third ground of appeal the Appellant challenges the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding regarding the General Requirements of Article 3 and Article 5 of the
                    Statute. The Appellant
                    argues that the Trial Chamber erroneously found in paragraph 46 the following facts: i) the
                    Appellant knew Milan Lukić well; ii) he also knew the other men who were associated with Milan
                    Lukić; iii) he knew that Milan Lukić and his men committed serious crimes; and
                    iv) despite that knowledge, the Appellant was seen together with those men on several occasions
                    during the period relevant to the Indictment. In addition, the Appellant argues that the Trial
                    Chamber committed errors of fact by finding that v) the Appellant was standing guard while money and
                    valuables disappeared during the search of Musići; vi) non-Serb citizens of Višegrad began
                    disappearing in early April 1992; vii) a burned Muslim woman was denied medical treatment; viii) the
                    acts of the Appellant were closely related to the armed conflict; and (ix) the acts of the Appellant
                    were part of a widespread and systematic attack of which he was aware. The Prosecution submits that
                    this ground of appeal should be dismissed as it does not reveal an error, but


                    rather is asking the Appeals Chamber to substitute the Trial Chamber’s finding with that of the
                    Appellant. 

196.    In the fourth ground of appeal, the Appellant submits that
                    the Trial Chamber erred both in law and fact by concluding that he intented to kill the seven Muslim
                    men and therefore, that he is guilty of murder. The alleged error of fact concerned the Appellant’s
                    intent to kill. The errors of law concerned: i) whether the Appellant’s convictions are cumulative;
                    ii) whether there was an agreement among the Appellant, Milan Lukić and the two unknown men and;
                    iii) whether participants in a joint criminal
                    enterprise are “equally guilty.” The Prosecution submitted that, on the bases of the totality of the

                    circumstances, it was reasonable for the Trial Chamber to conclude that the Appellant intended the
                    seven
                    Muslim men to be killed even if he did not actually carry out any of the killings. 

197.    The fifth ground of appeal concerns the Appellant’s
                    conviction of persecution as a crime against humanity for the inhumane acts (Count 3) inflicted on
                    the two survivors of the Drina River incident. In support of this ground, the Appellant refers to his arguments submitted in relation to the fourth
                    ground of appeal. The Appellant asserts that the Trial Chamber erred by finding: i) that there was
                    an understanding amounting to an agreement among Milan Lukić, the Appellant and two other men to
                    kill the seven Muslim men, and ii) that the Appellant personally participated in this joint criminal
                    enterprise with the intent to cause VG-14 and VG-32 “serious mental or physical suffering.” The Prosecution
                    relied on its response in relation to the other grounds of appeal. 

198.    In the sixth ground of appeal, the Appellant submits that
                    the Trial Chamber erred in finding him guilty of persecution as a crime against humanity for the
                    murder of five Muslim men and the inhumane acts inflicted (Count 3) on two other Muslim men in
                    relation to the Drina River incident. The main argument presented by the Appellant is that he did
                    not act with the requisite discriminatory intent for the crime of persecution. In his submissions,
                    the Appellant raised a number of arguments which are already included in the other grounds of
                    appeal. The Appellant first submits that the Trial Chamber erred in
                    finding that he acted as an informant to the Milan Lukić group. Second, the Appellant believes that

                    there is no evidence for finding beyond reasonable doubt that he intended to kill the seven Muslim
                    men. Third, the
                    Appellant argues that there was no agreement between him and the other participants to persecute the
                    Muslim population. The mere presence of the Appellant on the banks of the Drina River


                    is not sufficient to establish that there was such an agreement and therefore to find the Appellant
                    responsible for the joint criminal enterprise of persecution. Fourth, the Appellant submits that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the Appellant was aware
                    of previous illegal acts committed by the Lukić group. The Prosecution submits that it was not established that the Trial Chamber’s findings were
                    unreasonable on the bases of the available evidence and in fact, that it was the only reasonable
                    conclusion available to any reasonable trier of fact. 

199.    In the seventh ground of appeal, the Appellant argues that
                    the Trial Chamber erred in both law and fact when it applied the concept of joint criminal
                    enterprise in this case. The Appellant submits four sub-grounds in relation to this issue. In the
                    first sub-ground, the Appellant argued that the Trial Chamber committed an error of law by failing
                    to indicate the criteria applied in order to establish the existence of a joint criminal enterprise
                    in this case. Second, he argues that the Trial Chamber erred in
                    law when it concluded that the participants in a joint criminal enterprise are equally guilty. Third, the

                    Appellant argues that the Trial Chamber erred when accepting that the Appellant shared the intent of
                    the other perpetrators of the joint enterprise. The Appellant challenges the Trial Chamber’s
                    findings with respect to the shared intent on the following grounds: i) an error of fact in the
                    Trial Chamber’s finding that an agreement existed; ii) an error of fact in the Trial Chamber’s finding that the Appellant provided assistance to the
                    other perpetrators; iii) the absence of a finding of any general or specific homicidal intent on the Appellant’s part; iv) the reliance on the Appellant’s
                    failure to prevent Milan
                    Lukić from committing the crimes; v) the
                    absence of any proof that the Appellant carried a weapon; and vi) the absence of any proof of the Appellant’s actual participation in the shooting. The Appellant’s fourth sub-ground on
                    the issue of joint criminal enterprise is that the requirements for proving liability as an aider
                    and abettor were not considered and would not have been satisfied in the present case. The Prosecution
                    submits that the present case involved the first category of joint criminal enterprise liability
                    established in the Tadić Appeal Judgement, that no error has been demonstrated, and that this ground of appeal should be dismissed.

200.    Under the eighth ground of appeal, the Appellant submits
                    that the Trial Chamber erred both in law and fact when it sentenced him to twenty years
                    imprisonment. The Appellant argues that the sentence imposed on him is extremely high and that he
                    was sentenced more than once for the same act, despite the Trial Chamber’s statement to the
                    contrary. The Appellant requests that the Appeals Chamber acquit him or grant him a new trial. In
                    the alternative, the Appellant submits that the sentence should be
                    reduced. The Prosecution
                    argues that the Appellant was not able to establish in any of the arguments

                    submitted in this ground of appeal that the Trial Chamber made a discernible error in the exercise
                    of its discretion and that this ground should therefore be dismissed. 
D. Assignment of Judges

201.    On 8 January 2013, Judge Jorda, then President of the
                    International Tribunal, in accordance with Article 12(3) of the Statute, assigned Judges
                    Shahabuddeen, Güney, Gunawardana, Pocar and Meron, the bench of the Appeal Chamber in the present
                    case. 

202.    On 28 January 2013, pursuant to Rules 65ter and 107 of the
                    Rules, the President assigned Judge
                    Shahabuddeen as Pre-Appeal Judge. 

203.    On 18 June 2013, the President of the International
                    Tribunal, Judge Meron, taking into consideration the changes in the composition of the Appeals
                    Chamber assigned himself, Judges Jorda, Shahabuddeen, Güney and Weinberg de Roca to the bench in
                    this case. 

204.    On 26 September 2013, due to further changes in the
                    composition of the Appeals Chamber, Judge Schomburg was assigned to this case to replace Judge
                    Jorda. 
E. Rule 115 motion

205.    On 24 June 2013, the Appellant submitted a “Defence Motion
                    for Additional Evidence” (“Defence Motion”) pursuant to Rule 115 of the Rules, requesting the
                    admission as additional evidence of five documents, a videotape and a transcript. The documents submitted concern the ownership of a


                    house in the municipality of Višegrad and relate to the Trial Chamber’s finding that the Appellant
                    acted as an informant to the Milan Lukić group.

206.    Following the order of the Pre-Appeal Judge, the Appellant filed an Addendum to the Defence Motion on 11 July 2013. On 17 July 2013, the
                    Prosecution submitted its response arguing that the Defence Motion should be dismissed and that the
                    proposed additional evidence should not be admitted. 

207.    The Appeals Chamber issued its decision on 21 October 2013,
                    finding that the documents proposed as additional evidence were available at trial and the Appellant
                    did not establish that the exclusion of the additional evidence would lead to a miscarriage of
                    justice. The Appeal Chamber found that the additional evidence was inadmissible and dismissed the Appellant’s
                    motion.
F. Oral Arguments

208.    Oral arguments were heard on 18 November 2013. 
X. ANNEX B: GLOSSARY OF TERMSAkayesu Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No. ICTR-96-4-A, Judgement, 1 June 2001Akayesu Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No. ICTR-96-4-T, Judgement, 2 September 1998Aleksovski Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-A, Judgement, 24 March 2000Aleksovski Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-T, Judgement, 25 June 1999ATTranscript of appeal hearing in Prosecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-A. All
                            transcript pages referred to in this judgement are taken from the unofficial, uncorrected
                            version of the transcript. Minor differences may therefore exist between the pagination
                            therein and that of the final transcript released to the publicBanović Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Predrag Banović, Case No. IT-02-65/1-S, Sentencing Judgement, 28 October
                            2003BCSBosnian Croatian Serbian languagesBlaškić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-T, 3
                            March 2000Bosnia and HerzegovinaRepublic of Bosnia and HerzegovinaČelebići Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić et al, Case No. IT-96-21-A, Judgement, 20 February 2001Čelebići Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić et al, Case No. IT-96-21-T, Judgement, 16 November 1998Defence Appeal BriefDefence Appellant’s Brief Against Judgement of November
                            29, 2012, filed by counsel for Mitar Vasiljević on 24 June
                            2013Defence Additional Appeal Brief(Additional) Defence Appeal Brief, filed by counsel for
                            Mitar Vasiljević on 24 June 2013Defence ReplyDefence Respondent’s Brief Against Prosecution Respondents Brief of 18 August 2013, filed
                            confidentially by Counsel for Mitar Vasiljević on 2 September 2013. Public redacted version
                            filed on 17 November 2013Defence Additional Reply(Additional) Defence Brief in Reply, filed by counsel for
                            Mitar Vasiljević on 2 September 2013.Delić Rule 115 DecisionProsecutor v. Hazim Delić, Case No.: IT-96-21-R-R119, Decision on motion for Review, 25
                            April 2002Drina River incidentThe shooting of seven Muslim civilians on the bank of the Drina River on 7 June 1992, in
                            which five of the Muslim men were killedErdemović Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Dra`en Erdemović, Case No. IT-96-22-A, Judgement, 7 October 1997Erdemović First Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Dra`en Erdemović, Case No. IT-96-22-T, Sentencing Judgement, 29 November
                            1996Erdemović Second Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Dra`en Erdemović, Case No. IT-96-22-Tbis, Sentencing Judgement, 5 March
                            1998Furund`ija Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Anto Furund`ija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-A, Judgement, 21 July 2000Furund`ija Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Anto Furund`ija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-T, Judgement, 10 December 1998ICTRInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
                            Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
                            Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens responsible for genocide and other such violations committed in
                            the territory of neighbouring States, between
                            1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994IndictmentProsecutor v. Mital Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-PT, Amended Indictment, 12 July 2001International TribunalInternational Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
                            International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
                            1991Jelisić Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No. IT-95-10-A, Judgement, Judgement, 5 July 2001Jelisić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No. IT-95-10-T, Judgement, Judgement, 14 December 1999Jelisić Rule 115 DecisionProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No.: IT-95-10-A, Decision on Request to Admit Additional
                            Evidence, 15
                            November 2000JNAYugoslav People’s ArmyJudgementProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-T, Judgement, 29 November 2012Kayishema/Ruzindana Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Clément Kayishema & Obed Ruzindana, Case
                            No. ICTR-95-T, Judgement, 21 May 1999Krnojelac Appeals JudgementProsecutor v Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-A, Judgement, 17 September 2003Krnojelac Trial JudgementProsecutor v Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-T, Judgement, 15 March 2002Krstić Rule 115 DecisionProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-A, Decision on Application for Admission
                            of Additional Evidence on Appeal, 5 August 2003Krstić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-T, Judgement, 2 August 2001Kunarac Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac et al, Case No. IT-96-23- A & IT-96-23/1-A, Judgement,
                            12 June 2002Kunarac Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac et al, Case No. IT-96-23- T & IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement,
                            22 February 2001Kupreškić Appeals JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić et al., Case No. IT-95-16-A, Judgement, 23 October 2001Kupreškić Rule 115 DecisionProsecutor v Zoran Kupreškić et al, Case No.: IT-95-16-A, Decision on the Motions of
                            Appellants Kupreškić et al to Admit Additional Evidence, 26 February 2001Kupreškić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić et al., Case No. IT-95-16-T, Judgement, 14 January 2000Kvočka Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka et al., Case No. IT-98-30/1- T, Judgement, 2 November 2001Musema Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Alfred Musema, Case No. ICTR-96-13-T, Judgement, 27 January 2000Ojdanić DecisionProsecutor v. Milutinović et al, Decision on Dragoljub Ojdanić’s Motion Challenging
                            Jurisdiction – Joint Criminal Enterprise, Case No.: IT-99-37-AR72, 21 May 2003Plavšić Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Biljana Plavšić, Case No. IT-00-39&40/1-S, Sentencing Judgement, 27
                            February 2003ProsecutionThe Office of the ProsecutorProsecution Response BriefProsecution Respondent’s Brief, filed confidentially on 18
                            August 2013. Public redacted version filed on 7 November
                            2013RulesRules of Procedure and Evidence of the TribunalRuggiu Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Georges Ruggiu, Case No. ICTR-97-32-I, Judgement and Sentencing, 1 June
                            2000Serushago Appeals JudgementOmar Serushago v. the Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-98-39- A, Appeal against Sentencing:
                            Reasons for Judgement, 6 April 2000Serushago SentencingProsecutor v. Omar Serushago, Case No. ICTR-98-39-S, Sentence, 5 February 1999SFRYSocialist Federal Republic of YugoslaviaSimić Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Simić, Case No. IT-95-9/2, Sentencing
                            Judgement, 17 October 2002Simić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Blagoje Simić et al, Case No. IT-95-9-T, Judgement, 17 October 2003StatuteStatute of the TribunalTTranscript of trial hearing in Prosecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-T. All
                            transcript pages referred to in this judgement are taken from the unofficial, uncorrected
                            version of the transcript. Minor differences may therefore exist between the pagination
                            therein and that of the final transcript released to the publicTadić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Judgement, 15 July 1999Tadić Jurisdiction DecisionProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-AR72, Decision on the Defence Motion for
                            Interlocutory Appeal on Jurisdiction, 2 October 1995Tadić Rule 115 DecisionProsecutor v. Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Decision on Appellant’s Motion for Extension of
                            the Time Limit and Admission of Additional Evidence, 15 October 1998Tadić Sentencing AppealProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A & IT-94-1- Abis, Judgement in Sentencing
                            Appeals, 26 January 2000Tadić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Judgement, 7 May 1997TOTerritorial DefenceTodorović Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Stevan Todorović, Case No. IT-95-9/1-S, Sentencing Judgement, 31 July 2001