Šainović decision

UNITED NATIONS







International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
        Responsible for Serious Violations of International
        Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former
        Yugoslavia since 1991



Case No.

Date:

Original



IT-05-87-A

23 January 2014

English

IN THE APPEALS CHAMBER







Before:



Judge Liu Daqun, PresidingJudge Mehmet GüneyJudge Fausto PocarJudge Arlette RamarosonJudge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov







Registrar:



Mr. John Hocking







Judgement of:



23 January 2014

PROSECUTOR

v.NIKOLA ŠAINOVIĆNEBOJŠA PAVKOVIĆVLADIMIR LAZAREVIĆSRETEN LUKIĆ

PUBLICJUDGEMENT



The Office of the Prosecutor:

Mr. Peter Kremer QC assisted byMs. Elena Martin Salgado and Ms. Virginie Monchy re: Mr. Nikola Šainović; Mr. Aditya Menon and Mr. Todd Schneider re: Mr. Nebojša Pavković;Mr. Mathias Marcussen re: Mr. Vladimir Lazarević;Ms. Daniela Kravetz and Mr. Kyle Wood re: Mr. Sreten Lukić;Ms. Michelle Jarvis and Mr. Nema Milaninia re: Prosecution Appeal

Counsel for the Defence:

Mr. Toma Fila and Mr. Vladimir Petrović for Mr. Nikola ŠainovićMr. John Ackerman and Mr. Aleksandar Aleksić for Mr. Nebojša PavkovićMr. Mihajlo Bakrač and Mr. Đuro Čepić for Mr. Vladimir LazarevićMr. Branko Lukić and Mr. Dragan Ivetić for Mr. Sreten Lukić

CONTENTS






►I. INTRODUCTION





A. BACKGROUND

B. THE APPEALS

C. APPEAL HEARING




II. STANDARD OF REVIEW








III. ALLEGED ERRORS IN RELATION TO FAIR TRIAL








IV. ALLEGED ERRORS IN RELATION TO THE INDICTMENT








►VI. UNDERLYING CRIMES





A. INTRODUCTION




VII. JOINT CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE








►VIII. AIDING AND ABETTING





A. INTRODUCTION

B. ALLEGED ERRORS IN FINDING THAT LAZAREVIć AIDED AND ABETTED DEPORTATION AND FORCIBLE TRANSFER

1. Introduction

2. Alleged errors in relation to the existence of the common plan

3. Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in forcible displacement

(a) Preliminary issue – specific direction

(b) Lazarević’s involvement in joint operations in 1998

(c) Lazarević’s involvement in joint operations in 1999

(i) Submissions of the parties

(ii) Analysis

(d) Lazarević’s involvement in incorporating volunteers into the Priština Corps

(e) Lazarević’s failure to take adequate measures to ensure investigations of crimes by VJ members

(i) Submissions of the parties

(ii) Analysis

(f) Lazarević’s inspection of VJ units

(i) Submissions of the parties

(ii) Analysis

(g) Impact of the Appeals Chamber’s findings

4. Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević fulfilled the mens rea of aiding and abetting

(a) Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević was aware that forcible displacement was likely to occur in 1999

(i) Submissions of the parties

(ii) Analysis

(b) Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević knew of the campaign of forcible displacement

(i) Lazarević’s presence in Priština/Prishtina in 1999

(ii) Lazarević’s knowledge of crimes committed in 1999

a. Reports on the commission of crimes sent by subordinate units

b. Lazarević’s awareness that the operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley involved forcible displacement

c. Diković’s warning

d. Drewienkiewicz’s press statement

e. Alleged error in finding that orders for forcible displacement were given orally

f. Alleged error in finding that Lazarević’s attempt to prevent the mistreatment of Kosovo Albanians showed knowledge of forcible displacement

g. Reports from subordinate units on measures in relation to the civilian population

(iii) Conclusion

(c) Lazarević’s orders for the protection of civilians

(d) Whether Lazarević knew that his conduct assisted forcible displacement

(e) Conclusion

5. Conclusion

C. ALLEGED ERRORS IN ACQUITTING LAZAREVIć OF AIDING AND ABETTING MURDER

1. Introduction

2. Whether the Trial Chamber applied the correct legal standard for the mens rea of aiding and abetting

(a) Submissions of the parties

(b) Analysis

3. Whether the Trial Chamber erred in fact in finding that the mental element of aiding and abetting murder had not been established with respect to Lazarević

(a) Submissions of the parties

(b) Analysis




►IX. SENTENCING





A. INTRODUCTION

B. ŠAINOVIć’S APPEAL

C. PAVKOVIć’S APPEAL

D. LAZAREVIć’S APPEAL

1. Alleged errors in the assessment of gravity

2. Alleged errors in assessing mitigating factors

E. LUKIć’S APPEAL

F. PROSECUTION’S APPEAL

G. COMMON APPEAL ON THE FAILURE TO INDIVIDUALISE SENTENCES

H. CONCLUSION

I. IMPACT OF THE APPEALS CHAMBER’S FINDINGS ON SENTENCES




X. DISPOSITION








XI. PARTIALLY  DISSENTING OPINION AND DECLARATION OF JUDGE LIU








XII. OPINION DISSIDENTE DU JUGE RAMAROSON








►XIII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE TUZMUKHAMEDOV





A. Introduction

B. Šainović’s contribution to the JCE

C. Specific Direction




XIV. ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL HISTORY








►XV. ANNEX B: CITED MATERIALS AND DEFINED TERMS





A. JURISPRUDENCE

1. Tribunal

2. ICTR

3. Special Court for Sierra Leone

4. European Court of Human Rights

5. Human Rights Committee

6. Post-WWII cases

7. Other Jurisdictions

(a) Australia

(b) Belgium

(c) Canada

(d) France

(e) Hong Kong

(f) Israel

(g) Japan

(h) Luxembourg

(i) Mexico

(j) New Zealand

(k) South Africa

(l) UK

(m) US

B. DEFINED TERMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
I. 	INTRODUCTION

1.    The  Appeals  Chamber  of  the  International  Tribunal  for  the  Prosecution  of  Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991 (“Appeals Chamber” and “Tribunal”, respectively) is seised of the appeals filed by Nikola Šainović (“Šainović”), Nebojša Pavković (“Pavković”), Vladimir Lazarević (“Lazarević”), Sreten Lukić (“Lukić”) (collectively, “Appellants”), and the Office of the Prosecutor (“Prosecution”) against the Judgement rendered by Trial Chamber III of the Tribunal (“Trial Chamber”) on 26 February 2009 in the case of Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al. (“Trial
Judgement”). 


A.   Background

2.    Šainović was born on 7 December 1948 in Bor, Serbia, and was active in the Socialist Party of Serbia. He held several positions within the governments of Serbia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (“FRY”), including Prime Minister of Serbia and Deputy Prime Minister of the FRY. He served as one of a number of Deputy Prime Ministers of the FRY from February 1994 until on or about 4 November 2000, when a new Federal Government was formed. 

3.    Pavković  was  born  on  10  April  1946  in  Senjski  Rudnik,  Serbia,  and  held  numerous positions in the Yugoslav People’s Army (“JNA”) and the Army of Yugoslavia (“VJ”). In 1994, he was assigned to the Priština Corps, where he served in various positions in the command staff until he was appointed Commander of the Corps on 9 January 1998. Pavković was appointed Commander of the 3rd Army of the VJ  on 28 December 1998, and took up this position on 13 January 1999, in which he remained until early 2000. He was appointed Chief of the General Staff of the VJ in February 2000. 

4.    Lazarević was born on 23 March 1949 in Grnčar, Serbia. He held numerous positions in the JNA and  VJ  and  was  appointed Chief of  Staff of  the  Priština Corps in  January 1998. On 25 December 1998, Lazarević was appointed Commander of the Priština Corps and held that position until 28 December 1999, when he was appointed Chief of Staff of the 3rd  Army. On 13 March 2000, Lazarević was appointed Commander of the 3rd  Army and, in early 2002, he became the Assistant for Ground Forces within the General Staff of the VJ, a position which he held until the end of his military career in October 2004. 

5.    Lukić was born on 28 March 1955 in Višegrad, Bosnia and Herzegovina. After graduating from the Belgrade military academy, he served in various posts within the Ministry of Interior (“MUP”). In 1991, Lukić was appointed to the position of Deputy Head of the Secretariat of the Interior of the City of Belgrade. In June 1998, he was appointed to serve as the Head of the MUP Staff in Priština/Prishtina. Upon the completion of his assignment in Kosovo he was appointed the Head of the Border Police Administration and, in 2001, he was promoted to the position of Head of the Public Security Department of the MUP. 

6.    The events giving rise to this case took place between March and June 1999 and concern the forcible displacement of the Albanian population in Kosovo. The Trial Chamber found that during that time, the following crimes were committed: deportation as a crime against humanity; other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as a crime against humanity; murder as a crime against humanity; sexual assault, murder, and the destruction of or damage to religious property as forms of persecution as a crime against humanity; and murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war. 

7.    The  Trial  Chamber  further  found  that  “during  the  time  of  the  crimes  alleged  in  the Indictment” a joint criminal enterprise (“JCE”) existed, the common purpose of which was to ensure continued control by the FRY and Serbian authorities over Kosovo, which was to be achieved by criminal means. It determined that “ t hrough a widespread and systematic campaign of terror and violence, the Kosovo Albanian population was to be forcibly displaced both within and without Kosovo.” The Trial Chamber further concluded that while the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer were within the ambit of the common purpose, the crimes of murder, sexual assault, and destruction of cultural property fell outside the common purpose. 

8.    The Trial Chamber found that Šainović possessed the intent to forcibly displace the Kosovo Albanian population and contributed significantly to the JCE. As the members of the JCE used VJ and MUP forces in furtherance of their common purpose, the crimes committed by these forces in the course of implementing the common purpose were found to be imputable to Šainović. As regards the crimes falling outside the common purpose, the Trial Chamber held that the murders of Kosovo Albanians and the destruction of or damage to religious property were reasonably foreseeable to Šainović, while the occurrence of sexual assaults was not. The Trial Chamber convicted Šainović  of committing, through participation in the JCE, deportation, other inhumane acts  (forcible  transfer),  murder,  and  persecution  as  crimes  against  humanity  and  murder  as  a violation of the laws or customs of war, pursuant to Articles 3, 5(a), 5(d), 5(h)-(i), and 7(1) of the Statute of the Tribunal (“Statute”). Šainović  was sentenced to a single term of 22 years of imprisonment. 

9.    The Trial Chamber found that Pavković shared the intent to forcibly displace the Kosovo Albanian population and contributed significantly to the JCE. As the members of the JCE used VJ and MUP forces in furtherance of their common purpose, the crimes committed by these forces in the course of implementing the common purpose were found to be imputable to Pavković. The Trial Chamber further found that the crimes falling outside the common purpose were reasonably foreseeable to Pavković. The Trial Chamber convicted Pavković of committing, through participation in the JCE, deportation, other inhumane acts (forcible transfer), murder, and persecution as crimes against humanity and murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war, pursuant to Articles 3, 5(a), 5(d), 5(h)-(i), and 7(1) of the Statute. Pavković was sentenced to a single term of 22 years of imprisonment. 

10.    The Trial Chamber found that it had not been established that Lazarević shared the intent of the  members  of  the  JCE  and  could  accordingly  not  be  held  responsible  under  this  mode  of liability. Instead, the Trial Chamber found Lazarević to have aided and abetted the crimes of
deportation and forcible transfer in which the VJ was involved. The Trial Chamber convicted Lazarević of aiding and abetting deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity, pursuant to Articles 5(d), 5(i), and 7(1) of the Statute. Lazarević was sentenced to a single term of 15 years of imprisonment. 

11.    The Trial Chamber found that Lukić shared the intent to forcibly transfer the Kosovo Albanian population and that he made a significant contribution to the JCE. As the members of the JCE used VJ and MUP forces in furtherance of their common purpose, the crimes committed by these forces in the course of implementing the criminal enterprise were found to be imputable to Lukić. With regard to the crimes falling outside the common purpose, the Trial Chamber found that the murders of Kosovo Albanians and the destruction of or damage to religious property were reasonably foreseeable to Lukić, whereas the occurrence of sexual assaults was not. The Trial Chamber convicted Lukić of committing, through participation in  the  JCE, deportation, other inhumane acts (forcible transfer), murder, and persecution as crimes against humanity and murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war, pursuant to Articles 3, 5(a), 5(d), 5(h)-(i), and 7(1) of the Statute. Lukić was sentenced to a single term of 22 years of imprisonment. 


B.   The appeals

12.    Šainović presents seven grounds of appeal challenging his convictions and sentence. He requests that the Appeals Chamber reverse his convictions and enter acquittals or, in the alternative, order a new trial or, if any conviction is upheld, determine that the sentence of 22 years of imprisonment imposed by the Trial Chamber is excessive and impose a more lenient sentence. The Prosecution responds that none of Šainović’s challenges demonstrate any error on the part of the Trial Chamber and that his appeal should be accordingly dismissed in its entirety. 

13.    Pavković sets out 12 grounds of appeal challenging the fairness of the trial proceedings, his convictions, and sentence. He requests that the Appeals Chamber reverse the Trial Judgement and enter an acquittal on all charges or, if any of his convictions is upheld, reduce the sentence of 22 years  imposed  on  him  by  the  Trial  Chamber. In  response, the  Prosecution submits that Pavković’s appeal is without merit and should be rejected. 

14.    Lazarević advances four grounds of appeal challenging his convictions and sentence. He requests that the Appeals Chamber reverse his convictions or order a re-trial. In the alternative, Lazarević submits that his sentence of 15 years of imprisonment should be reconsidered and reduced. The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s appeal is unfounded and should be dismissed in its entirety. 

15.    Lukić sets out 37 grounds of appeal challenging the fairness of the trial proceedings, his convictions, and sentence. Lukić requests that the Appeals Chamber enter a verdict of acquittal on all counts or order a re-trial. In the alternative, Lukić requests that the Appeals Chamber reduce his sentence of 22 years of imprisonment. In response, the Prosecution contends that Lukić fails to explain or establish how the Trial Chamber erred in law or fact and submits that Lukić’s appeal should be rejected. 

16.    The Prosecution presents six grounds of appeal against the Trial Judgement. In particular, it requests that the Appeals Chamber convict: (i) the Appellants of persecution as a crime against humanity through forcible transfer and deportation; (ii) Lazarević for aiding and abetting murder and persecution through murder as crimes against humanity and murder as a violation of the laws or customs  of  war  for  the  killings  at  Korenica/Korenicë,  Meja/Mejë,  and  Dubrava/Lisnaja; (iii) Šainović and Lukić for persecution as a crime against humanity for the sexual assaults in Beleg and Ćirez/Qirez; (iv) Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić for persecution as a crime against humanity for the sexual assaults in Priština/Prishtina; and (v) Lazarević for aiding and abetting deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity with respect to certain locations. The Prosecution submits that the sentences of the Appellants should be increased in the event that these convictions are entered. The Prosecution submits that, in any event, the sentences imposed by the Trial Chamber were too low and should be increased. 

17.    In  response, Šainović, Pavković, Lazarević, and  Lukić oppose the  Prosecution’s appeal insofar as they are individually concerned.


C.    Appeal hearing

18.    The Appeals Chamber heard oral submissions of the parties regarding their appeals from 11 to 15 March 2013. Having considered their written and oral arguments, the Appeals Chamber hereby renders its Judgement. The Appeals Chamber will not necessarily address the grounds of appeal in the order presented by the parties, but group them by subject matter where appropriate.


II. 	STANDARD OF REVIEW

19.    On appeal, parties must limit their arguments to legal errors that invalidate the decision of the trial chamber and to factual errors that result in a miscarriage of justice. These criteria are set forth in Article 25 of the Statute and are well established in the jurisprudence of both the Tribunal and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (“ICTR”). In exceptional circumstances, the Appeals Chamber will also hear appeals in which a party has raised a legal issue that would not lead to the invalidation of the trial judgement but that is nevertheless of general significance to the Tribunal’s jurisprudence. 

20.    A party alleging an error of law must identify the alleged error, present arguments in support of its claim, and explain how the error invalidates the decision. An allegation of an error of law that has no chance of changing the outcome of a decision may be rejected on that ground. However, even if the party’s arguments are insufficient to support the contention of an error, the Appeals Chamber may still conclude for other reasons that there is an error of law. It is necessary for any appellant claiming an error of law on the basis of the lack of a reasoned opinion to identify the specific issues, factual findings, or arguments that an appellant submits the trial chamber omitted to address and to explain why this omission invalidated the decision. 

21.    The Appeals Chamber reviews the trial chamber’s findings of law to determine whether or not they are correct. Where the Appeals Chamber finds an error of law in the trial judgement arising from the application of the wrong legal standard, the Appeals Chamber will articulate the correct legal standard and review the relevant factual findings of the trial chamber accordingly. In so doing, the Appeals Chamber not only corrects the legal error, but, when necessary, applies the correct legal standard to the evidence contained in the trial record and determines whether it is itself convinced beyond reasonable doubt as to the factual finding challenged by an appellant before the finding is confirmed on appeal. The Appeals Chamber will not review the entire trial record de novo. Rather, it will in principle only take into account evidence referred to by the trial chamber in the body of the trial judgement or in a related footnote, evidence contained in the trial record and referred to by the parties, and, where applicable, additional evidence admitted on appeal. 

22.    When considering alleged errors of fact, the Appeals Chamber will apply a standard of reasonableness. In reviewing the findings of the trial chamber, the Appeals Chamber will only substitute its own finding for that of the trial chamber when no reasonable trier of fact could have reached the original decision. The Appeals Chamber applies the same reasonableness standard to alleged errors of fact regardless of whether the finding of fact was based on direct or circumstantial evidence. Further, only an error of fact which has occasioned a miscarriage of justice will cause the Appeals Chamber to overturn a decision by the trial chamber. 

23.    In  determining whether  or  not  a  trial  chamber’s  finding  was  reasonable, the  Appeals Chamber will not lightly disturb findings of fact by a trial chamber. The Appeals Chamber recalls, as a general principle, that:







Pursuant to the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, the task of hearing, assessing and weighing the evidence presented at trial is left primarily to the Trial Chamber. Thus, the Appeals Chamber must give a margin of deference to a finding of fact reached by a Trial Chamber. Only where the evidence relied on by the Trial Chamber could not have been accepted by any reasonable tribunal of fact or where the evaluation of the evidence is “wholly erroneous” may the Appeals Chamber substitute its own finding for that of the Trial Chamber. 



24.    The same standard of reasonableness and the same deference to factual findings applies when the Prosecution appeals against an acquittal. Thus, when considering an appeal by the Prosecution, the Appeals Chamber will only hold that an error of fact was committed when it determines that no reasonable trier of fact could have made the impugned finding. Considering that it is the Prosecution that bears the burden at trial of proving the guilt of an accused beyond reasonable doubt, the significance of an error of fact occasioning a miscarriage of justice is somewhat different for a Prosecution appeal against acquittal from a defence appeal against conviction. An accused must show that the trial chamber’s factual errors create a reasonable doubt as to his guilt. The Prosecution must show that, when account is taken of the errors of fact committed by the trial chamber, all reasonable doubt of the accused’s guilt has been eliminated. 

25.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that, where additional evidence has been admitted on appeal and an alleged error of fact is raised, but there is no error in the legal standard applied in relation to the factual finding, the following two-step standard will apply:







(i) The Appeals Chamber will first determine, on the basis of the trial record alone, whether no reasonable trier of fact could have reached the conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt. If that is the case, then no further examination of the matter is necessary as a matter of law.(ii) If, however, the Appeals Chamber determines that a reasonable trier of fact could have reached a conclusion of guilt beyond reasonable doubt, then the Appeals Chamber will determine whether, in light of the trial evidence and additional evidence admitted on appeal, it is itself convinced beyond reasonable doubt as to the finding of guilt. 



26.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that it has inherent discretion in selecting which submissions merit a detailed reasoned opinion in writing, and may dismiss arguments which are evidently unfounded without providing detailed reasoning. Indeed, the Appeals Chamber’s mandate cannot be effectively and efficiently carried out without focused contributions by the parties. In order for the Appeals Chamber to assess a party’s arguments on appeal, the party is expected to present its case clearly, logically, and exhaustively. The appealing party is also expected to provide precise references to relevant transcript pages or paragraphs in the decision or judgement to which the challenges are being made. The Appeals Chamber will not consider a party’s submissions in detail when they are obscure, contradictory, vague, or suffer from other formal and obvious insufficiencies. 

27.    When applying these basic principles, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it has identified the types  of  deficient  submissions  on  appeal  which  need  not  be  considered  on  the  merits. In particular, the Appeals Chamber will dismiss without detailed analysis: (i) arguments that fail to identify the challenged factual findings, that misrepresent the factual findings or the evidence, or that ignore other relevant factual findings; (ii) mere assertions that the trial chamber must have failed to consider relevant evidence, without showing that no reasonable trier of fact, based on the
evidence could have reached the same conclusion as the trial chamber; (iii) challenges to factual findings on which a conviction does not rely, and arguments that are clearly irrelevant, that lend support to, or that are not inconsistent with the challenged finding; (iv) arguments that challenge a trial chamber’s reliance or failure to rely on one piece of evidence, without explaining why the conviction should not stand on the basis of the remaining evidence; (v) arguments contrary to common sense; (vi) challenges to factual findings where the relevance of the factual finding is unclear and has not been explained by the appealing party; (vii) mere repetition of arguments that were unsuccessful at trial without any demonstration that their rejection by the trial chamber constituted an error warranting the intervention of the Appeals Chamber; (viii) allegations based on material not on the record; (ix) mere assertions unsupported by any evidence, undeveloped assertions, failure to articulate an error; and (x) mere assertions that the trial chamber failed to give
sufficient weight to evidence or failed to interpret evidence in a particular manner. 


III. 	ALLEGED  ERRORS  IN RELATION TO FAIR TRIAL

[Omitted]


IV. 	ALLEGED  ERRORS  IN RELATION TO THE INDICTMENT

[Omitted]


VI. 	UNDERLYING  CRIMES
A.   Introduction

283.    The Trial Chamber found that during the spring of 1999, forces of the FRY and Serbia forcibly displaced the Kosovo Albanian population both within and outside Kosovo. The Trial Chamber also found that during this period, the forces of the FRY and Serbia killed at least 600 individuals and destroyed or damaged mosques during their forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population. On the basis of these findings, Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić were convicted through their participation in a JCE of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity pursuant to JCE I. Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić were also convicted, pursuant to JCE III, of murder and persecution through murder and destruction of or damage to religious property as crimes against humanity and murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war. In addition, Pavković was convicted of persecution through sexual assaults in Beleg and Ćirez/Qirez pursuant to JCE III. Lazarević was convicted for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity. 

284.    The Trial Chamber found that forces of the FRY and Serbia were responsible for raping Kosovo  Albanian  women  in  Priština/Prishtina  in  early  April  and  in  late  May 1999, but  it concluded that the Prosecution had failed to prove that the perpetrators of those crimes acted with discriminatory intent. As a result, the Trial Chamber concluded that the sexual assaults in question did not constitute persecution. In these circumstances, the Trial Chamber did not determine whether Šainović, Pavković, or Lukić should be held criminally responsible for the sexual assaults in Priština/Prishtina pursuant to JCE III. 



[Remainder of discussion omitted.]

[The Appeals Chamber upheld the Trial Chamber’s findings with relatively minor modifications.]


VII. 	JOINT CRIMINAL ENTERPRISE

[Omitted – concerns only defendantsŠainović, Pavković, and Lukić]


VIII. 	AIDING AND ABETTING
A.   Introduction

1605.    The Trial Chamber found that Lazarević provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in the deportation and forcible transfer of the Kosovo Albanian population in coordinated action with the MUP. The Trial Chamber accordingly convicted Lazarević pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity. 

1606.  Lazarević claims that the Trial Chamber erred in holding him criminally responsible for aiding and abetting deportation and forcible transfer. In addition, the Prosecution submits that the Trial Chamber erred in acquitting Lazarević of aiding and abetting murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution as crimes against humanity. The Appeals Chamber will address the parties’ submissions in turn.


B.   Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević aided and abetted deportation and forcible transfer
1.   Introduction

1607.    Lazarević held numerous positions in the JNA and the VJ. In January 1998, he was appointed Chief of Staff of the Priština Corps and, on 25 December 1998, he was appointed Commander of the Priština Corps. He remained in this position until 28 December 1999 when he was appointed Chief of Staff of the 3rd  Army and subsequently became Commander of the 3rd Army on 13 March 2000. 

1608.    The Trial Chamber convicted Lazarević pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute committed by the VJ in coordinated action with the MUP throughout Kosovo between 24 March and 25 May 1999. 

1609.  Lazarević challenges the Trial Chamber’s findings that he fulfilled the actus reus and mens rea of aiding and abetting forcible displacement. 


2.   Alleged errors in relation to the existence of the common plan

1610.    Lazarević  challenges  the  Trial  Chamber’s  conclusion  that  a  JCE  existed,  the  common purpose of which was to ensure continued control by the FRY and Serbian authorities over Kosovo through a campaign of forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population. In this regard, Lazarević contests the Trial Chamber’s factual findings that: (i) it was common practice for the FRY and Serbian forces to confiscate and destroy identity documents of Kosovo Albanians in the course of their displacement; (ii) a discernible pattern of crimes committed by the FRY and Serbian forces existed; (iii) the arming of the non-Albanian population and the disarming of the Kosovo Albanian population were carried out on ethnic grounds; and (iv) the authorities of the FRY and Serbia brought additional forces into Kosovo in breach of the October Agreements. Lazarević further argues that it was unreasonable for the Trial Chamber to conclude that he: (i) knew about and assisted in the confiscation of identity documents of Kosovo Albanians; (ii) was aware that the arming of the non-Albanian population and the disarming of the Kosovo Albanian population were carried out on ethnic grounds and “participated or in any other way contributed to the arming of  the  non-Albanian population”; and (iii) aided and abetted the violation of the October Agreements by the VJ. Lazarević further submits that it was not proved that he “intended  to contribute to the implementation” of the common plan. 

1611.    In response, the Prosecution avers that Lazarević’s submissions warrant summary dismissal as his conviction for aiding and abetting does not rely on the Trial Chamber’s factual findings in relation to the JCE. It further argues that Lazarević merely repeats his trial submissions without showing any error. 

1612.    In reply, Lazarević submits that his challenges to the Trial Chamber’s findings in relation to the common plan are advanced only for “reasons of cautiousness” to reiterate that no plan to expel the Kosovo Albanians with the purpose of changing the ethnic balance of Kosovo existed and that he thus could not have been aware of such a plan. 

1613.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that Lazarević was acquitted of JCE liability. He was convicted instead for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer. Given the Trial Chamber’s findings, the Appeals Chamber considers that the Trial Chamber’s discussion of evidence on the existence of the common plan is irrelevant to Lazarević’s conviction for aiding and abetting. Moreover, contrary to Lazarević’s assertion, in finding that his acts and omissions had a substantial effect upon the commission of the crimes by VJ members, the Trial Chamber made no reference to his purported awareness or assistance regarding the confiscation of identity documents of Kosovo Albanians, the arming of the non-Albanian population, and the disarming of the Kosovo Albanian population, or the violations of the October Agreements. For the same reasons, Lazarević’s assertion that he did not intend to contribute to the common purpose is misguided.

1614.    In light of the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber dismisses the second ground of Lazarević’s appeal and sub-ground 3(c) in relevant part.


3.   Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in forcible displacement

1615.    The Trial Chamber found that Lazarević voluntarily provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to the VJ forces involved in the forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians  in  coordinated  action  with  the  MUP. The  Trial  Chamber  noted  that,  as  the Commander  of  the  Priština  Corps,  Lazarević  significantly  participated  in  the  planning  and execution of the joint operations conducted by the VJ and that his orders provided authorisation within  the  VJ  chain  of  command  for  the  VJ  to  operate  in  the  crime  sites  where  forcible displacement took place. It also considered that “Lazarević’s presence in the field, inspecting VJ units that were involved in the commission of crimes against Kosovo Albanians, was expressly noted to improve the morale of soldiers”, and that he “knew that his failure to take adequate measures to secure the proper investigation of serious crimes committed by the VJ enabled the forces to continue their campaign of terror, violence, and displacement.” The Trial Chamber concluded that Lazarević’s:







acts and omissions provided a substantial contribution to the commission of the crimes that the Chamber has found to have been committed by VJ members  …  as they provided assistance in terms of soldiers on the ground to carry out the acts, the organisation and equipping of VJ units, and the provision of weaponry, including tanks, to assist these acts. Furthermore, Lazarević’s acts and omissions provided encouragement and moral support by granting authorisation within the VJ chain of command for the VJ to continue to operate in Kosovo, despite the occurrence of these
crimes by VJ members. 



1616.    Lazarević contends that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that, through his acts and omissions, he provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to members of the VJ who were involved in the commission of deportation and forcible transfer and that his conduct had a substantial effect upon the commission of these crimes. The Appeals Chamber will address his submissions in turn.


(a)   Preliminary issue – specific direction

1617.    Lazarević submits that the Trial Chamber erred in failing to determine whether his alleged acts and omissions were specifically directed to assist the commission of deportation and forcible transfer and thus in concluding that he aided and abetted these crimes. He argues that, in accordance with the Tribunal’s prevailing jurisprudence, specific direction is a required element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability. The Prosecution disputes this interpretation of the jurisprudence. It argues that specific direction is not an essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. The Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, will address the issue of specific direction raised by the parties before turning to Lazarević’s other challenges to the Trial Chamber’s findings that he provided practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support to the VJ members responsible for committing the crimes in question. In the view of the Appeals Chamber, the question of specific direction is a matter of first impression, even though several prior opinions contain conflicting but non-dispositive language that the parties seize upon to argue one way or the other.

1618.    Certain decisions of the Appeals Chamber have described the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability with reference to “specific direction.” The Tadić Appeal Judgement described the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability as “acts specifically directed to assist, encourage or lend moral support to the perpetration of a certain specific crime”. This description has been used in many subsequent decisions of this court. For example, the recent Perišić Appeal Judgment cited this description and also observed that “many subsequent Tribunal and ICTR appeal judgements have referred to this definition of aiding and abetting”. 

1619.    By contrast, in the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement, the Appeals Chamber had held that “‘specific direction’ is not an essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting.” This holding was confirmed by the Appeals Chamber in the Lukić and Lukić Appeal
Judgement, stating that “ in   Mrkšić and Šljivančanin,  the Appeals Chamber has clarified ‘that

 ‘specific direction’ is not an essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting’ and finds that there is no ‘cogent reason’ to depart from this jurisprudence.” 

1620.    Lazarević contends that the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement was ambiguous on the matter of specific direction and did not reflect “an intention to depart from the settled precedent established by the Tadić Appeal Judgement”. He considers that the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement merely made “passing reference to specific direction” and concludes that, since the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement did not state cogent reasons for departing from earlier precedent, it neither attempted nor intended to depart from settled jurisprudence. Lazarević contends further that the Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgement confirmed that the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement is not antithetical in its approach to specific direction. 

1621.    The Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, considers that in effect, the interpretation favored by Lazarević would appear to be at odds not only with a plain reading of the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement, which states that specific direction is not an “essential ingredient” of aiding and abetting liability, but also with the Lukić and Lukić
Appeal  Judgement,  which  confirmed  this  holding. In  this  respect,  the  Appeals  Chamber considers that when interpreting a particular judgement, primary consideration should be given to positions expressly taken and clearly set out in the judgement concerned. It is not clear that this approach  is being followed by Lazarević  with  respect  to  the  issue  of  specific direction as expressed in the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements. It would thus be more appropriate to conclude that the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement and the Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgement, on one hand, and Lazarević’s position, on the other hand, diverge on the issue of specific direction.

1622.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that where it is faced with previous decisions that are conflicting, it is obliged to determine which decision it will follow, or whether to depart from both decisions for cogent reasons in the interests of justice. In view of the apparent divergence between the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements, on one hand, and  the Tadić Appeal Judgement and other judgments citing it, on the other hand, the Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, will determine the correct approach. In so doing, mindful of its duty to act in the interests of legal certainty and predictability while ensuring that justice is done in all cases, the Appeals Chamber will consider the jurisprudence of the Tribunal and the ICTR as well as customary international law to ascertain where the law stands on the issue of specific direction.

1623.    Turning first to the jurisprudence of the Tribunal and the ICTR, the Appeals Chamber recalls that the Tadić Appeal Judgement held that an “aider and abettor carries out acts specifically
directed  to  assist,  encourage  or  lend  moral  support  to  the  perpetration  of  a  certain  specific crime”. This  delineation  of  accessorial  liability  appears  in  the  context  of  contrasting  JCE liability with that of aiding and abetting. Consequently, the Tadić Appeal Judgement, which focused on JCE liability, does not purport to be a comprehensive statement of aiding and abetting liability. The Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, therefore considers that Lazarević’s analysis of the previous case law relies on the flawed premise that the Tadić Appeal Judgement established a precedent with respect to specific direction. As noted in the Perišić Appeal Judgement, subsequent appeal judgements have referred to specific direction, often repeating verbatim the language used in the Tadić Appeal Judgement. However, a number of appeal judgements have not mentioned specific direction when examining the elements of the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability. Moreover, the Čelebići Appeal Judgement explicitly  endorsed  a  definition  of  aiding  and  abetting  liability  that  neither  refers  to  specific direction nor contains equivalent language. 

1624.    The Appeals Chamber observes that the Čelebići Appeal Judgement was not alone in its endorsement of a trial judgement that defined the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability without
reference to specific direction. The Blaškić Appeal Judgement explicitly found that the Blaškić Trial Judgement “was correct” in holding that “the actus reus of aiding and abetting ‘consists of practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support which has a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime.’” In so doing, the Blaškić Appeal Judgement noted that the Blaškić Trial Judgement followed the Furundžija  Trial Judgement, which pronounced this definition based on an analysis of customary international law. Although the Blaškić Appeal Judgement also referred to the Tadić Appeal Judgement’s formulation of aiding and abetting liability, the fact that the Blaškić Appeal Judgement ultimately relied upon and applied a statement of applicable law that excluded any reference to specific direction strongly suggests that it did not consider specific direction to be an element of aiding and abetting liability. 

1625.    After having examined the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, the Blagojević and Jokić Appeal Judgement subsequently confirmed that specific direction is not an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability. While the Blagojević and Jokić Appeal Judgement stated that “the Tadić definition has not been explicitly departed from”, it noted that “specific direction has not always been included as an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting” and considered that “this may be explained by the fact that such a finding will often be implicit in the finding that the accused has provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator which had a substantial effect
on the commission of the crime.” It thus merely observed that specific direction can be at times, 

though not necessarily always, factually implicit in a finding of substantial contribution. In so doing, and in light of the Čelebići and Blaškić precedents, it considered that specific direction is not an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting, while the substantial contribution of the aider and abettor is. Such interpretation is consonant with the fact that, prior to this case, no independent specific direction requirement was applied by the Appeals Chamber to
the facts of any case before it. By contrast, the substantial contribution of the accused has consistently been an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability. 

1626.    The Appeals Chamber further observes that the definition of the actus reus of aiding and abetting as “practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support which has a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime” reflects customary international law. As noted above, the Blaškić Appeal Judgement approved of this definition without inclusion of specific direction, noting that this standard was initially adopted in the Furundžija Trial Judgement. The Furundžija Trial Judgement elicited this definition from an analysis of customary international law. Nevertheless, in order to dispel any doubt in this regard, the Appeals Chamber will re-examine customary international law concerning the elements of aiding and abetting liability.

1627.    The Appeals Chamber first turns to examine the jurisprudence which dealt with crimes committed during the Second World War (collectively, “post WWII cases”) and which the Appeals Chamber considers instructive for the purpose of identifying the elements of aiding and abetting liability. The Appeals Chamber observes that in none of these relevant cases “specific direction” was required as a distinct element. Rather, they focused on: (i) the degree of each defendant’s contribution to a crime, demonstrated through the role he played in, and the impact he exerted on,

the commission of the crime; and (ii) whether the defendant knew that his acts contributed to the commission of the crime.

1628.    In the Zyklon B case before a British military court, three members of a private firm were charged with knowingly supplying poison gas, mainly “Zyklon B”, used for the extermination of allied nationals interned in concentration camps. Among the three, the owner and the second-in- command of the firm were found guilty, following the Judge Advocate’s instruction that the court must examine: (i) whether “ a llied nationals had been gassed by means of Zyklon B”; (ii) whether

“this gas had been supplied by  the firm ; and (iii) whether “the accused knew that the gas was to be used for the purpose of killing human beings.” The firm’s first gassing technician, who was in a subordinate position, was acquitted, following the Judge Advocate’s instruction that the court must consider whether he “was in a position either to influence the transfer of gas to Auschwitz or to prevent it.” The analysis therefore focused on whether each defendant had influence over the supply of the gas and knew of the unlawful use of the gas despite the stated lawful purposes, such as disinfecting buildings. Whether the defendants specifically directed the supply of the gas to the extermination was not a basis for the convictions. 

1629.    In the Schonfeld case heard by a British military court, four defendants were found guilty of being “concerned in the killing of” three airmen of the allied forces. In light of the factual circumstances in this case, the Judge Advocate provided, inter alia,  an overview of aiding and abetting liability in English law, noting that a party is an aider and abettor if he is “actually or
constructively present when the felony is committed” and that there must be “participation in the act” although it is not necessary to prove that he “actually aided in the commission of the offence”. The Judge Advocate further explained:







[I]f [a party] watched for his companions in order to prevent surprise, or remained at a convenient distance in order to favour their escape, if necessary, or was in such a situation as to be able readily to come to their assistance, the knowledge of which was calculated to give additional confidence to his companions, he was, in contemplation of law, present, aiding and abetting. 



These examples mentioned by the Judge Advocate suggest that the accused’s presence in the vicinity (moral encouragement as opposed to tangible support) could constitute the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability if it has the effect of giving additional confidence to the principal perpetrator, and that the purpose of the accused’s act, together with the principal perpetrator’s knowledge thereof, could be considered as potentially relevant evidence in this evaluation. 

1630.    In the Rohde case heard by a British military court, six defendants were found guilty of being “concerned in the killing of” British prisoners who were executed by lethal injection without any trial and then cremated. The convicted included the person who lit the oven at the crematorium after the killing. The Judge Advocate explained that for an accused to be “concerned in a killing” it was not necessary that he must have actually been present. The Judge Advocate further stated that if a lookout standing half a mile away from the actual murder took part with another “man with the knowledge that that other man was going to put the killing into effect then he was just as guilty as the person who fired the shot or delivered the blow.” Thus, the convictions were based on each accused’s contribution demonstrated through his role – including in carrying
out ex post facto cremation – and knowledge of the crime, i.e. the unlawful killing. 

1631.    In the Stalag Luft III case heard by a British military court, 18 defendants were convicted of “being concerned in the killing” of British prisoners of war, who were unlawfully executed by shooting. In light of the factual circumstances in this case, the Judge Advocate stated that “if people are all present, aiding and abetting one another to carry out a crime they knew was going to be committed, they are taking their respective parts in carrying it out, whether it be to shoot or whether it is to keep off other people or act as an escort  … , they are all in law equally guilty of committing that offence”. In explaining the term “concerned in the killing”, he further stated:







I do not think that the prosecution can ask you to consider a case of a minor official who was concerned with some administrative matter. What they had in mind is that the persons concerned must have been part of the machine doing some duty, carrying out some performance which went on directly to achieve the killing, that it had some real bearing on the killing, would not have been so effective or been done so expeditiously  if that person had not contributed his willing aid. 



This suggests that, in addition to the knowledge of a defendant, the important question to be asked was whether the concerned act “had some real bearing on the killing”, i.e. had a substantial effect on the killing, and that this is what the Judge Advocate meant when he used the expression “performance which went on directly to achieve the killing”. This observation is further supported by the court’s focus on: (i) what part each defendant played in the shooting of the prisoners, which showed the degree of his contribution to the commission of the crimes; and (ii) whether it was a
knowing participation. 

1632.    In the Holstein and Wagner cases before French military tribunals, the accused who were found guilty as accomplices were considered to fall within one of the following two categories pursuant to Article 60 of the then French Penal Code: (i) “₣tğhose who have furnished arms, instruments or any other means which have served in the action ₣constituting  a crime or delictğ
knowing that they would serve this purpose”; and (ii) “₣tğhose who knowingly aided or assisted the
perpetrator or perpetrators of the action in the facts which have prepared or facilitated or in those which have consumated  sic  the action”. The record does not indicate that the tribunals additionally examined whether the accused specifically directed their acts to the crimes. 

1633.    In the Pig-cart parade case heard by the German supreme court in the British occupied zone, the accused L, G, and S were found guilty of a crime against humanity under Control Council Law No. 10 for having participated in a parade in which two political opponents of the Nazi party were exposed to public humiliation in a pig truck. The accused P was acquitted. The court found that L, G, and S caused in part what the two victims suffered: (i) L got hold of the pig truck; (ii) G led the marching band and accompanied the demonstration; and (iii) S accompanied the pig truck wearing his uniform and carrying a rifle. It found that the three accused were old Nazi officials and that it was inconceivable that they were not at least aware of the risk of people being assaulted by a system of violence and injustice and accepted such an outcome by reconciling themselves with it (dolus eventualis). The court also held that more is not required in respect of the mental elements. Regarding the accused P, the court found that he followed the parade merely as spectator in civilian clothes. It found that, accordingly, it was neither proved that he became part of
the  cause  nor  that  he  possessed  the  mens rea  meeting  the  standard  of  dolus  eventualis. 

Therefore, the convictions and acquittal were based on whether the defendants contributed to the commission of the crime and whether the mens rea met the dolus eventualis standard. 

1634.    In the Roechling case, dealt with by French military tribunals under Control Council Law No. 10, Hermann Roechling, General Director of his family-owned steel firm, was found guilty of having committed war crimes involving economic spoliation of the occupied countries. Ernst Roechling, who acted as the firm’s representative in France, was found guilty as an accessory to these  actions  by  Hermann  Roechling.  In  its  analysis  the  appellate  tribunal  focused  on  the importance of Ernst Roechling’s role in the economic plunder and spoliation in France as well as his knowledge of the significance of his own role and of Hermann Roechling’s activities. As a result, it overturned Ernst Roechling’s acquittal entered by the tribunal of first instance. In addition, the appellate tribunal upheld the convictions of two members of the Directorate of the firm as “coauthors or accomplices” to Hermann Roechling’s acts in relation to the deportation and employment of persons and prisoners of war and the ill-treatment inflicted upon them. In reaching these conclusions, the appellate tribunal held:







Hermann Roechling and the other accused members of the Directorate of the   firm   are not accused of having ordered this horrible treatment, but of having permitted it; and indeed supported it, and in addition, of not having done their utmost to put an end to these abuses. In adopting this attitude they permitted the continued existence and further development of this inhuman situation and thus, particularly through this tolerance, participated in the maltreatment within the meaning of Law No. 10. 



The appellate tribunal’s analysis thereby focused on the positions and powers of the above- mentioned three defendants which provided them with sufficient authority to intervene and improve the treatment of the deported workers who were subject to the terrible conditions that were known or must have been known to these defendants. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber observes that, in the Roechling case, the essential consideration in determining accessorial or accomplice liability was  the  impact  that  each  defendant  could  exert  on  the  principal’s offences  as  well  as  their awareness thereof.

1635.    Applying  Control  Council  Law  No. 10,  the  US  military  tribunals  in  Nuremberg  also similarly focused on: (i) the degree of each defendant’s contribution to the commission of the crimes, evinced through the part each defendant played and the effect of his conduct on the crimes; and (ii) the knowledge that each defendant had.

1636.    For  instance,  in  the  Einsatzgruppen  case, the  tribunal  acquitted  defendant  Ruehl,  a member of a Sonderkommando of Einsatzgruppe D, of war crimes and crimes against humanity finding that, while he “had knowledge of some of the illegal operations of” this Sonderkommando, he did not take part in any “executive operation nor did his low rank place him automatically into a position where his lack of objection in any way contributed to the success of  any  executive  operation.” Additionally,  in  relation  to  defendant  Graf,  a  member  of Einsatzkommando 6, the tribunal held that while he knew of some of the executions, “more than mere knowledge of illegality of crime is required in order to establish guilt”. The tribunal further opined that “ s ince there is no evidence in the record that Graf was at any time in a position to protest against the illegal actions of others, he cannot be found guilty as an accessory  to crimes against humanity and war crimes .” In contrast, with respect to defendant Klingelhoefer, who was in charge of various units and later an interpreter with Einsatzgruppe B, the tribunal held that, even if his functions had been limited to that of an interpreter, “it would not exonerate him from

guilt because in locating, evaluating and turning over lists of Communist party functionaries to the executive department of his organization he was aware that the people listed would be executed when found” and that, “ i n this function, therefore, he served as an accessory to the crime.” The tribunal also convicted defendant Fendler, who served in Einsatzgruppe C and was not alleged to have personally conducted executions. The tribunal found that he knew that executions were taking place and failed to do anything about it, although as the second highest ranking officer in the Kommando his views could have been heard. 

1637.    As the Furund`ija trial chamber observed, the above findings in the Einsatzgruppen case indicate that “knowledge of the criminal activities of the organisation combined with a role in that organisation was not sufficient”. Rather, in addition, “the defendants’ acts in carrying out their duties had to have a substantial effect on the commission of the offence for responsibility to ensue.” The Appeals Chamber concurs with this observation.

1638.    The  Flick  case further  supports  this  conclusion.  In  this  case,  the  tribunal  found defendants Flick and Steinbrinck guilty of contributing large sums to the financing of the SS. In
reaching this conclusion, the tribunal first opined that:







One who knowingly by his influence and money contributes to the support  of an organisation which on a large scale is responsible for war crimes and crimes against humanity  must, under settled legal  principles, be  deemed to  be,  if  not  a  principal, certainly an  accessory to  such
crimes. 



1639.    The tribunal found that Steinbrinck could not have remained wholly ignorant of the criminal activities of the SS under the administration of Himmler. It further found that Flick and Steinbrinck became members of the Himmler Circle of Friends and that members of the Circle were called upon to contribute money to Himmler and were informed that the money was “to be
spent for some of  Himmler’s  cultural hobbies and for emergencies for which he had no appropriations.” Flick and Steinbrinck each had to contribute annually 100,000 Reichsmarks and, through a special fund of a bank, this money went into a second bank account upon which Himmler’s personal adjutant drew checks. The tribunal held that none of the defendants knew of the “specific purpose” of the checks. It further held:







Nor did the prosecution show that any part of the money was directly used for the criminal activities of the SS. It is reasonably clear that some of the funds were used purely for cultural purposes. But during the war and particularly after the beginning of the Russian campaign we cannot  believe  that  there  was  much  cultural  activity  in  Germany.  A  hundred  thousand Reichsmarks even to a wealthy man was not then a trifling but a substantial contribution. Ten times that sum annually was placed in the hands of Himmler, the Reich Leader SS, for his personal use and was continued year after year without a thought on  the part of the defendants , according to their testimony, that any portion of it might be used by him to maintain the organization of which he was the head. It is a strain upon credulity to believe that he needed or spent annually a million Reichsmarks solely for cultural purposes or that members of the Circle could reasonably believe that he did.

…  It remains clear from the evidence that each of them gave to Himmler, the Reich Leader SS, a blank check. His criminal organization was maintained and we have no doubt that some of this money went to its maintenance. It seems to be immaterial whether it was spent on salaries or for lethal gas. 



1640.    The convictions were therefore based on the defendants’ substantial contribution to and knowledge  of  criminal  activities.  It  was  not  additionally  required  that  the  contribution  be specifically directed to criminal activities.

1641.    This approach was also taken in the Justice case. The tribunal found that defendant

Rothenberger, president of the District Court of Appeals in Hamburg and later Under Secretary in


the Ministry of Justice, was “instrumental” in denying Jews their fair trial rights. The tribunal found that, while this appeared to be a “small matter compared to the extermination of Jews by the millions under other procedures”, it was “nevertheless a part of the government-organized plan for the persecution of the Jews, not only by murder and imprisonment but by depriving them of the means of livelihood and of equal rights in the courts of law.” The tribunal further found that Rothenberger must have known that the inmates of the Mauthausen concentration camp were there either without trial, following acquittal, or after the expiration of their term of imprisonment. Thus he was aware of the system of “protective custody” but did not object to it. The tribunal found Rothenberger guilty of:







taking a minor but consenting part in the Night and Fog program. He aided and abetted in the program of racial persecution, and notwithstanding his many protestations to the contrary he materially contributed toward the prostitution of the Ministry of Justice and the courts and their subordination to the arbitrary will of Hitler, the Party minions, and the police. He participated in the corruption and pervasion of the judicial system. 



1642.    The Appeals Chamber further observes that, with regard to other defendants in the Justice
case as well as in other cases heard by the US military tribunals under Control Council Law
No. 10, “specific direction” was not required as an element of any form of accessorial liability.

The same holds true in the findings of the International Military Tribunal. The criteria employed in these cases were rather whether the defendants substantially and knowingly contributed to relevant crimes.

1643.    The Appeals Chamber now turns to national law on the elements of aiding and abetting liability. At the outset, the Appeals Chamber recalls that under the doctrine of general principles of law recognised by nations, national legislation and case law may be relied upon as a source of international principles or rules in limited situations. Such reliance, however, is permissible only where it is shown that most, if not all, countries accept and adopt the same approach to the notion at
issue. More specifically, it would be necessary to show that the major legal systems of the world
take the same approach to that notion. 

1644.    Having conducted a review of national law, the Appeals Chamber considers that this is not the case with respect to the notion of “specific direction”. Specifically, in light of the variation
among national jurisdictions with respect to aiding and abetting liability, the Appeals Chamber

considers that no clear common principle in this respect can be gleaned from the major legal systems of the world. As a common basis, for aiding and abetting liability to arise, national legislation and the jurisprudence of domestic courts require the provision of assistance or support which facilitates the commission of a crime. However, national jurisdictions conceptualise the link between the acts of assistance and the crime in the context of actus reus and the required degree of mens  rea  in  various  different  ways  in  accordance  with  principles  in  their  respective  legal
systems. 

1645.    For instance, in some civil law countries, such as France, Belgium, and Algeria, it is required that the aider or abettor provided assistance to the principal perpetrator and thereby facilitated the commission of the crime by that principal perpetrator, with the awareness that his act would provide assistance to the commission of the crime. In other countries of civil law tradition, such as Germany, Bulgaria, China, and Japan, it is required that the aider and abettor, by providing assistance, facilitated the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrator. In addition, it must be established that he did so with the dolus, which is often translated in English as “intent” and encompasses either purpose, knowledge with certainty (dolus directus), or the awareness and acceptance of the likelihood that the crime could be committed and that his act could facilitate the commission of the crime (dolus eventualis). Dolus eventualis is the minimum requirement. In some common law countries, such as Australia and Canada, the aider and abettor must have both intent and knowledge, while the required amount of assistance in order for liability to arise, for the most part, is relatively low. In contrast, while English law also requires both intent and knowledge, the aider and abettor must make an essential contribution to the commission of the crime. As to the United States, while there is a Model Penal Code, its approach to accomplice liability is not uniformly adopted throughout the country. Consequently, states vary with respect to the applicable theories of accomplice liability, especially in relation to the relevant mens rea standard. In Iran, the Islamic Penal Code requires that the accessory commit a positive act by which he knowingly and intentionally facilitates the commission of the crime. 

1646.    The survey of the above mentioned countries suffices for the Appeals Chamber to discern that requiring “specific direction” for aiding and abetting liability is not a general, uniform practice in national jurisdictions.

1647.    Finally, the Appeals Chamber briefly examines international instruments. The Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind adopted by the International Law Commission (“ILC”) in 1996 (“ILC Draft Code”) is not binding, but “is an authoritative instrument, parts of which may constitute evidence of customary international law, clarify customary rules, or, at the very least, ‘be indicative of the legal views of eminently qualified publicists representing the major legal  systems  of  the  world.’” Article  2(3)(d)  of  the  ILC  Draft  Code  provides  that  “ an individual shall be responsible for a crime set out in  the ILC Draft Code  if that individual  … knowingly aids, abets or otherwise assists, directly and substantially, in the commission of such a crime,  including  providing  the  means  for  its  commission.” Regarding  the  actus   reus requirement, the Commentary of the ILC explains that, for aiding and abetting liability to arise, an individual must “provide the kind of assistance which contributes directly and substantially to the commission of the crime.” The Commentary further notes that “ thus, the form of participation of an accomplice must entail assistance which facilitates the commission of a crime in some significant way.” As correctly noted in the Furundžija Trial Judgement, this conforms with the post WWII cases which demonstrate that “the relationship between the acts of the accomplice and of the principal must be such that the acts of the accomplice make a significant difference to the commission of the criminal act by the principal.” 

1648.    Article 25(3)(c) of the ICC Statute, adopted in 1998, provides that “a person shall be criminally responsible and liable for punishment for a crime within the jurisdiction of the Court if that person  …    for the purpose of facilitating the commission of such a crime, aids, abets or otherwise assists in its commission or its attempted commission, including providing the means for its commission”. The phrase “directly and substantially” in the ILC Draft Code is not included in this provision, while the phrase “ f or the purpose of facilitating the commission of such a crime” has been added. This has led some scholars to consider that, compared to the ILC Draft Code, the ICC Statute may have lowered the threshold of the actus reus requirement, while apparently adopting a higher mens rea standard. However, how the chambers of the International Criminal Court (“ICC”) interpret Article 25(3)(c) of the ICC Statute and define the elements of the mode of liability under this article remains to be seen. Moreover, while the ICC Statute may be in many areas regarded as indicative of customary rules, in some areas it creates new law or modifies existing law. The adoption of an international treaty, by itself, does not necessarily prove that states consider the content of that treaty to express customary international law. 

1649.    Based on the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, comes to the compelling conclusion that “specific direction” is not an element of aiding and abetting liability under customary international law. Rather, as correctly stated in the Furund`ija  Trial Judgement and confirmed by the Blaškić Appeal Judgement, under customary international law, the actus reus of aiding and abetting “consists of practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support which has a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime.” The required mens rea is “the knowledge that these acts assist the commission of the offense”. The Appeals Chamber reaffirms the position taken by the Blaškić Appeal Judgement in this regard.

1650.    Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber confirms that the Mrkšić and Šljivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements stated the prevailing law in holding that “‘specific direction’ is not an essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting”, accurately reflecting customary international law and the legal standard that has been constantly and consistently applied in determining aiding and abetting liability. Consequently, the Appeals Chamber, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, unequivocally rejects the approach advocated by Lazarević as it is in direct and material conflict with the prevailing jurisprudence on the actus reus of aiding and abetting liability and with customary international law in this regard. 

1651.    In light of the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber finds that in assessing the actus reus of aiding and abetting, the Trial Chamber was not required to determine whether Lazarević’s acts were specifically directed to assist, encourage or lend moral support to the commission of the crimes by the VJ and thus dismisses Lazarević’s arguments to the contrary.
(b) Lazarević’s involvement in joint operations in 1998

1652.    Lazarević challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding that he contributed to the implementation of joint operations conducted by the MUP and the VJ in the border area between Kosovo and Albania during the second half of 1998 by ordering the engagement of units in the sector of Slup/Sllup and Vokša/Voksh villages on 14 August 1998 and by monitoring the action which took place on 15 August 1998. 

1653.    The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s arguments should be summarily dismissed since the alleged errors concern factual findings on which his conviction does not rely. 

1654.    The Appeals Chamber notes that Lazarević was neither charged with nor convicted of crimes committed in Kosovo in 1998. Nor did the Trial Chamber rely on its factual findings on Lazarević’s involvement in the Slup/Sllup and Vokša/Voksh operation in 1998 to find that he aided and  abetted  the  commission  of  crimes  by  VJ  members  in  Kosovo  in  1999. Lazarević’s challenges thus pertain to factual findings that have no bearing on his conviction. The Appeals Chamber therefore dismisses sub-ground 3(a) of his appeal.
(c) Lazarević’s involvement in joint operations in 1999

1655.    In concluding that Lazarević voluntarily provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in the forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians, the Trial Chamber specifically considered Lazarević’s involvement in joint operations of the MUP and the VJ in 1999. In particular, the Trial Chamber found that two large-scale plans, Grom 3 and Grom 4, were prepared by the VJ at the beginning of 1999. The Trial Chamber further found that Lazarević implemented these plans by, inter alia, issuing the Grom 3 and Grom 4 orders on 7 February  and  6 April 1999,  respectively, which  sent  the  VJ  into  Kosovo. The  Trial Chamber concluded that several joint operations were carried out in late March through the end of May 1999, pursuant to orders issued by the Priština Corps Command. The Trial Chamber consequently found that:







Lazarević  significantly  participated  in  the  planning  and  execution  of  the  joint  operations conducted by the VJ, acting solely or in co-ordination with the MUP, on the ground in Kosovo from March to June 1999. His Grom 3 and 4 orders, and the Joint Command orders—which the Priština Corps drafted—sent the VJ into actions in Kosovo and provided the authorisation within the VJ chain of command for the VJ to operate in the crime sites where many of the forcible displacements of Kosovo Albanians were conducted. 



The Trial Chamber further found that these acts:







provided a substantial contribution to the commission of the crimes  …  found to have been committed by VJ members  …  as they provided assistance in terms of soldiers on the ground to carry out the acts, the organization and equipping of VJ units, and the provision of weaponry, including tanks, to assist these acts. 


(i) Submissions of the parties

1656.    Lazarević disputes the Trial Chamber’s finding that his actions were voluntary. He contends that: (i) he only planned the activities of his subordinate units pursuant to directives and orders from the 3rd Army Command and the VJ General Staff; (ii) nothing in the orders he received indicated that their execution would aid and abet the commission of any crime; and (iii) his activities were directed to defence against the NATO bombing and the KLA. Lazarević further argues that it was unreasonable for the Trial Chamber to find that he assisted with the provision of weaponry because it is “legitimate and normal” for military units to be supplied with weaponry, including tanks, during a war, particularly when facing an opposing force with the might of NATO and the KLA. 

1657.    Lazarević further argues that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the Grom 3 and Grom 4 plans which were issued for the defence of the country – not aimed at the civilian population – and were planned at a higher level than the Priština Corps. He also claims that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the cooperation between the VJ and the MUP, arguing that: (i) the VJ planned operations only for its units, not for the MUP; (ii) cooperation “was reduced to a level of individual contacts of lower ranking officers”; and (iii) several joint operations were ordered in May 1999 by the Priština Corps Command based on the orders for the re-subordination of the MUP forces to the VJ, but that such re-subordination did not occur. 

1658.    Finally,   Lazarević   challenges   the   Trial   Chamber’s   finding   that,   despite   receiving information about crimes, such as murder, rape, looting, and robbery, allegedly committed by the MUP in the zone of responsibility of the VJ 37th Motorised Brigade in May 1999, Lazarević continued to approve joint VJ and MUP operations, such as the attack on the village of Dubrava/Lisnaja on 25 May 1999, which involved the forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians. He  argues  that  the  operation  in  Dubrava/Lisnaja  was  in  the  zone  of  the 243rd Motorised Brigade, while the crimes allegedly committed by the MUP occurred in the zone of responsibility of the 37th Motorised Brigade. Lazarević reiterates that he was duty-bound to approve the joint actions of the VJ and the MUP since Milošević’s order concerning the re- subordination of the MUP to the VJ was still in force and that he could not decline to authorise such actions without a specific order to that effect from his superior command. 

1659.    The Prosecution responds that Lazarević merely repeats arguments he made at trial or misrepresents the Trial Chamber’s factual findings. It further submits that Lazarević’s argument that he acted in defence against NATO and the KLA conflates jus ad bellum and jus in bello and that his conduct remains illegal under international humanitarian law. The Prosecution submits that the defence of military necessity is not applicable in his case because the limited exceptions where this defence is allowed under international humanitarian law do not correspond to the facts of this case, and these exceptions were expressly considered by the Trial Chamber when stating the law on forcible displacement. It also contends that Lazarević’s argument that his actions were not voluntary because he was merely executing orders is unsubstantiated and that, in any case, the defence of superior orders does not apply before the Tribunal. 

1660.    The Prosecution further submits that Lazarević’s attempt to isolate the crimes committed by the MUP from the joint operation he later ordered in Dubrava/Lisnaja ignores the Trial Chamber’s findings that the VJ and MUP forces cooperated in a campaign of violence aimed at displacing Kosovo Albanian civilians across the whole of Kosovo. It further contends that Lazarević’s submission that he lacked the authority to cease cooperation between the VJ and the MUP is unsubstantiated. 
(ii) Analysis

1661.    The Appeals Chamber first turns to Lazarević’s arguments that he planned the activities of his subordinate units pursuant to directives and orders of the 3rd Army and that he was duty-bound to approve the joint actions of the VJ and the MUP while re-subordination orders were in effect. The Appeals Chamber recalls that the fact that an accused acted pursuant to superior orders does not relieve him of criminal and that, even where a lawful order exists to conduct an operation, an accused may still incur criminal responsibility for crimes committed in the course of that operation. The fact that a higher level of military command directed Lazarević to plan the operations of the Priština Corps does not in itself preclude his responsibility for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer committed in the course of such operations. Accordingly, his argument that he was following orders and that his actions were thus not voluntary is inapposite and he has failed to show any error on the part of the Trial Chamber.

1662.    Lazarević’s contention that his orders were issued in defence of the country against NATO and the KLA is likewise misguided. Whether the resort to the use of force is legitimate under international law is a question of jus ad bellum, which is distinct from whether the way in which that force was used was legal under international humanitarian law, i.e. jus in bello. The rules of international humanitarian law do not require a military commander to refrain from defending his country but demand that he ensure that his conduct and that of his subordinates comply with established humanitarian principles. In any event, the Trial Chamber found that, while the VJ and the MUP launched their joint offensive against the KLA and NATO, they also launched a widespread and systematic campaign of forcible displacement against the civilian population. 

1663.    The Appeals Chamber further finds no error in the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević’s role in the provision of weaponry rendered practical assistance to the commission of crimes by the VJ forces. The Appeals Chambers finds that a reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that undertaking such tasks, with the awareness that the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer were being committed by the troops, amounts to rendering practical assistance to the  perpetrators.  In  this  context,  the  Appeals  Chamber  recalls,  as  addressed  previously,  that “specific direction” is not an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. Thus Lazarević’s assertion that it was legitimate to supply VJ units with weaponry in light of the fight against NATO and the KLA is inapposite.

1664.    As to Lazarević’s claim that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the Grom 3 and Grom 4 plans and the cooperation between the VJ and the MUP, the Appeals Chamber notes that Lazarević repeats verbatim entire passages from his Closing Brief, without showing any error of the Trial Chamber warranting the Appeals Chamber’s intervention. Further, Lazarević’s submission that the VJ planned operations only for its units and that cooperation between the VJ and the MUP was based on “individual contacts of lower ranking officers” ignores the Trial Chamber’s detailed analysis of orders issued by the Priština Corps Command for the conduct of joint operations. Significantly, the Trial Chamber referred to Lazarević’s Grom 3 order issued on 16 February 1999, instructing the Priština Corps Command subordinate units to act in coordination with specific MUP units, as well as to several orders issued in May 1999 envisaging the conduct of joint operations in different sectors. 

1665.    Lazarević’s argument that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that several joint operations were ordered by the Priština  Corps Command in  May 1999 based on the orders for  the  re- subordination of the MUP forces to the has no bearing on his convictions. The Trial Chamber found that such re-subordination did not occur in practice; rather, it found that the relationship between the VJ and the MUP remained that of cooperation and coordination. 

1666.    Finally, the Appeals Chamber finds unpersuasive Lazarević’s argument that the crimes allegedly committed by the MUP prior to the commencement of the operation in Dubrava/Lisnaja occurred in a different zone of VJ responsibility than the joint operation he later ordered. In this respect, the Appeals Chamber notes the Trial Chamber’s finding on the widespread and systematic nature of the campaign of violence and forcible displacement that took place throughout Kosovo at the time and the fact that Lazarević’s report to the 3rd Army Command, containing information on the commission of crimes against Kosovo Albanian civilians, did not confine the occurrence of such crimes to one area of Kosovo. Consequently, Lazarević has failed to show that a reasonable trier of fact could not have concluded that he continued to approve joint VJ and MUP operations despite receiving information about crimes allegedly committed by the MUP. 

1667.    The Appeals Chamber recalls its finding that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that based on his knowledge of events by the end of 1998, Lazarević was aware that forcible displacement was likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999. The Appeals Chamber, however, recalls that it has also found that a reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that Lazarević was aware of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement carried out by the VJ and the MUP during joint operations in Priština/Prishtina from 24 March 1999. The Appeals Chamber therefore considers that it was established that Lazarević possessed the requisite mens rea of aiding and abetting at this time. Accordingly, Lazarević’s issuance of the Grom 3 order to the Priština Corps units on 7 February 1999 cannot be considered as an act of assistance to the commission of deportation and forcible transfer by the VJ forces, as it was not established that at the time of its issuance, he had the requisite mens rea for aiding and abetting the commission of forcible displacement by the VJ. The Appeals Chamber, however, finds that this consideration does not undermine the Trial Chamber’s overall finding that Lazarević assisted the commission of crimes by sending “the VJ into actions in Kosovo and provid₣ingğ the authorisation within the VJ chain of command for the VJ to operate in the crime sites where many of the forcible displacements of Kosovo Albanians were conducted.” In this regard, the Appeals Chamber observes that the Trial Chamber’s finding on his participation in the planning and execution of joint operations in Kosovo (constituting part of his actus reus of aiding and abetting) was not based solely on his issuance of the Grom 3 order, but also on his issuance of the Grom 4 order to the Priština Corps units on 6 April 1999 and his role in issuing orders with the Joint Command heading to the units for operations from late March 1999 throughout the Indictment period. 

1668.    In light of the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber dismisses sub-grounds 3(c), 3(f), and 3(i) of Lazarević’s appeal in relevant part.
(d) Lazarević’s involvement in incorporating volunteers into the Priština Corps

1669.    Lazarević raises a number of challenges to the Trial Chamber’s findings concerning the incorporation of volunteers into the VJ units. The Appeals Chamber notes, however, that the Trial Chamber made no reference to Lazarević’s involvement in or knowledge of the problems associated with volunteers in assessing his liability for aiding and abetting the crimes committed by the  VJ. Moreover,  while  the  Trial  Chamber  found  that  Lazarević  was  aware  that  whole companies of volunteers continued to operate, it concluded that the Prosecution had failed to show that Lazarević assisted volunteers in by-passing regular procedure. Indeed, it noted that Lazarević had in fact issued orders to improve the selection and discipline of volunteers. The Appeals Chamber therefore considers that the errors Lazarević alleges in this regard have no impact upon his conviction.

1670.    Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber dismisses sub-ground 3(d) of Lazarević’s appeal.
(e) Lazarević’s  failure  to  take  adequate  measures  to  ensure  investigations  of  crimes  by  VJ members

1671.    The Trial Chamber found that Lazarević failed to take adequate measures to ensure the proper investigation of serious crimes committed by the VJ. It concluded that his omission in this respect contributed to the commission of the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer by VJ forces. 

1672.    In reaching this conclusion, the Trial Chamber relied on the evidence of Lakić Đorović, a former military prosecutor, that, while the military justice system functioned throughout the NATO air campaign, it only prosecuted a small proportion of the violent crimes against Kosovo Albanians whereas crimes against the VJ or Serbian victims were prosecuted more effectively. The Trial Chamber further relied on a Priština Corps order of 7 May 1999 to find that Lazarević could initiate additional investigations and disciplinary proceedings within the VJ, even where criminal investigations had commenced. It further found that the widespread commission of forcible displacement, together with the lack of criminal prosecutions for such acts, supported the Prosecution’s contention that Lazarević intentionally failed to ensure prosecutions of subordinates responsible for forcibly displacing Kosovo Albanians. 
(i) Submissions of the parties

1673.    Lazarević argues that he lacked control over the course of investigations and prosecutions as the military tribunals and military prosecutors functioned independently. He further contends that the Trial Chamber erred in noting that only a small proportion of the violent crimes against Kosovo Albanians were subject to prosecution. Lazarević refers, inter alia, to Đorović’s testimony that 1,400 criminal reports had disappeared from his office and that pressure to cease investigations was exerted upon Đorović by members of the Security Administration and the chief military prosecutor. Lazarević avers that the 1,400 criminal reports were the  result of his efforts and that whenever he acquired knowledge of crimes committed by VJ members he took measures against the perpetrators. Lazarević further contends that there is no evidence that an omission of his resulted in the commission of any crime. 

1674.    The Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber correctly found that Lazarević had the power to initiate additional investigations and disciplinary proceedings within the VJ. It maintains that Lazarević’s arguments should be summarily dismissed, since he repeats his trial submissions without showing any error and seeks to replace the Trial Chamber’s evaluation of the evidence with his own interpretation. It further submits that Lazarević does not identify a specific  error  in  the  Trial  Chamber’s  conclusions  as  a  whole  and  fails  to  address  the  Trial Chamber’s comprehensive findings on the functioning of the military justice system. 
(ii) Analysis

1675.    At the outset, the Appeals Chamber considers that, contrary to Lazarević’s interpretation, the Trial Chamber did not imply that he exercised control over the course of judicial investigations and prosecutions. Rather, in finding him responsible for aiding and abetting by omission, the Trial Chamber considered that Lazarević failed to take adequate measures within his powers as Commander of the Priština Corps, which would have facilitated subsequent criminal proceedings. This is plainly illustrated by the Trial Chamber’s findings both on the functioning of the military justice system and on Lazarević’s actions in relation to the investigation of crimes committed by Priština Corps members. 

1676.    Regarding the measures that Lazarević took in response to the commission of crimes by members of the VJ, the Trial Chamber found that the evidence showed that “Lazarević undertook some punitive measures against subordinates for the crimes of murder and rape, along with property crimes.” These measures included reporting the commission of such crimes in regular combat reports, the  filing  of  criminal reports,  and  in  some  instances,  initiating efforts  to  investigate particular incidents. The Trial Chamber, however, considered that while measures were taken in relation to some types of crimes, the evidence did not demonstrate “any prosecutions undertaken or punishments imposed in respect of  in particular  the forcible expulsion of Kosovo Albanians by VJ members” despite the widespread commission of forcible displacement. The Trial Chamber reasoned that this supported the conclusion that Lazarević failed to undertake adequate measures to address in particular the commission of forcible displacement by the VJ, including efforts to ensure this crime was properly investigated and punished. The Trial Chamber then found that this omission on his part contributed to the commission of forcible displacement by the VJ. 

1677.    The Appeals Chamber recalls that a person may be held criminally responsible for aiding and abetting by omission where he or she fails to discharge a legal duty and by this failure assists, encourages or lends moral support to the perpetration of a crime and has a substantial effect on the commission of that crime. Additionally, aiding and abetting by omission necessarily requires that the accused has “the ability to act, or in other words, that there were means available to the accused to fulfil this duty”. 

1678.    The Appeals Chamber considers that while Lazarević’s failure to take investigative and punitive measures against the commission of forcible displacement may have had an effect on the ability  of  the  military  prosecutor  to  pursue  perpetrators  of  such  crimes,  this  in  itself  is  not conclusive for the purposes of establishing aiding and abetting liability. Rather as recalled above, in order to fulfil the actus reus of aiding and abetting, it must be demonstrated that any such omission substantially contributed to the continued commission of forcible displacement. The Appeals Chamber, however, observes that the Trial Chamber did not engage in such an analysis or provide reasoning in support of its finding that through his omission in this respect, Lazarević provided practical assistance to members of the VJ involved in the commission of forcible displacement.

1679.    The Appeals Chamber considers that, in the present case, the evidence before the Trial Chamber was insufficient to support the conclusion that had Lazarević filed additional criminal reports,  initiated  additional  investigation  or  disciplinary  proceedings,  or  otherwise  taken  any available adequate measures, within his powers as Commander of the Priština Corps, there would have been more effective prosecution of the crimes committed by the VJ, including forcible transfer and deportation, and/or the commission of such crimes would have been substantially less likely. The Appeals Chamber first observes in this context that the Trial Chamber found that during the relevant time period, Lazarević did take some measures in response to the commission of crimes such  as  murder,  rape,  and  property  crimes,  including  by  submitting  criminal  reports  to  the competent authorities, initiating efforts in some instances to investigate alleged crimes, and issuing orders and instructions to subordinate units regarding the procedures and measures to be taken against perpetrators of crimes. The Trial Chamber also noted that in April and May 1999, reports were sent by Priština Corps subordinate units to the Priština Corps Command informing the Corps Command of actions that had been taken at the brigade level in relation to soldiers suspected of having committed crimes against civilians, including the filing of criminal reports as well as the arrest and transfer of such individuals to the competent military judicial authorities. 

1680.    The Appeals Chamber further observes that notably the Trial Chamber found that the military justice system’s failure to effectively investigate, prosecute, and punish those responsible for committing serious crimes against the civilian population was due to a combination of both internal and external factors, the latter being beyond the control of the VJ commanders. With regard to internal factors, the Appeals Chamber notes the evidence considered by the Trial Chamber indicating that the office of the military prosecutor was significantly hindered in its attempts to prosecute serious crimes committed by the Serbian forces during spring 1999. For example, the Trial Chamber noted the evidence of Lakić Ðorović, a military prosecutor attached to the Belgrade Military District from 24 March to 20 May 1999, that “in practice, despite the language in the Constitution on independence and legality, military courts were neither independent nor did they adjudicate on the basis of law” and that significant pressure and control was exerted over the military prosecutor’s office by the military security organs under the direction of the state and military leadership. The Trial Chamber further noted that Ðorović explained that “in a large number of cases during the conflict prosecutors were prevented from criminally prosecuting perpetrators of serious crimes” and that “in practice, the military security organs decided who would and who would not be prosecuted in cases of the most serious crimes, rather than the military prosecutors themselves.” Ðorović testified that 1,400 criminal reports, including statements made concerning murders, disappeared from his office, according to him in an effort by the VJ security services to cover up the crimes. The Appeals Chamber further notes in this context the evidence of a meeting in Belgrade on 4 May 1999, attended by inter alia Milosević, Milutinović, Ojdanić, Pavković, and Lukić to discuss events in Kosovo, following the receipt of Tribunal Prosecutor Louise Arbour’s letter, noting her concerns about serious breaches of international humanitarian law, including attacks against the civilian population. At the meeting, “information was presented that the security forces of the VJ had dealt with numerous cases of violence, killings, pillage, and other crimes and had arrested several hundred perpetrators whose crimes were a great danger to the civilian population” and it was concluded that “the work of the military courts had made the future occurrences of such crime ‘impossible’ as they had already processed many cases for crimes against the civilian population and handed down a ‘large number’ of sentences between 5 and  20 years  imprisonment  for  these  crimes.” As  observed  by  the  Trial  Chamber,  the information conveyed at this meeting is “inconsistent with official reports on the work of the military justice system” as “ n one of these reports indicate that any sentences between 5 and 20 years’ imprisonment had been imposed by the military courts for crimes against civilians by 4 May 1999”. The Appeals Chamber considers this to be a further illustration of the interference of the state and military leadership in the work of the military justice system.

1681.    Furthermore, the Appeals Chamber notes that, as found by the Trial Chamber, the forcible displacement crimes were committed pursuant to a joint criminal enterprise, planned and implemented by those in the highest command of the Serbian political and military leadership, including Milosević, who as President of the FRY (and as the “Supreme Commander”) exercised political control over the VJ, and Pavković, Lazarević’s immediate superior and to whom he reported. Taking into account these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber considers that it is unclear what degree of effect, if any, additional investigative and punitive measures undertaken by Lazarević at the corps level would have had on the commission of the crimes of forcible transfer and deportation by members of the VJ.

1682.    The Appeals Chamber thus considers that irrespective of any failure on his part to take more adequate measures to report, investigate, and initiate disciplinary measures, no reasonable trier of fact could have found beyond reasonable doubt that his omission in this respect had a substantial effect on the commission of the forcible displacement, i.e. that it would have been substantially less likely had Lazarević taken such further measures. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that Lazarević aided and abetted by omission the commission of forcible  displacement  through  “his  failure  to  take  adequate  measures  to  secure  the  proper investigation of serious crimes committed by the VJ”. In light of this conclusion, it is therefore unnecessary to  address  Lazarević’s remaining  arguments concerning this  finding  of  the  Trial Chamber. 

1683.    Based on the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber therefore grants sub-grounds 3(h) of Lazarević’s appeal to the extent that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that his failure to take adequate investigative and punitive measures substantially contributed to the commission of the crimes of forcible transfer and deportation by VJ forces.
(f) Lazarević’s inspection of VJ units

1684.    The Trial Chamber found that “through his acts and omissions, Lazarević provided practical assistance, encouragement, and moral support to members of the VJ, who were involved in the commission of forcible transfer and deportation”. The Trial Chamber concluded that Lazarević’s “presence in the field, inspecting VJ units that were involved in the commission of crimes against Kosovo Albanians, was expressly noted to improve the morale of soldiers.” 
(i) Submissions of the parties

1685.    Lazarević submits that visiting and controlling the VJ units in the field cannot in and of itself satisfy the actus reus of aiding and abetting deportation and forcible transfer. Lazarević avers that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted his presence in the field, the purpose of which was to improve the morale of soldiers under heavy bombardment by NATO, not to encourage them to participate in crimes. He further submits that Kosovo as a geographic whole cannot represent one crime scene in the legal sense and that, since he was not present at any crime scene, he could not have encouraged the perpetrators. Lazarević finally claims that mere presence at the crime scene is insufficient, unless it is proven that it had an encouraging effect on the perpetrators. 

1686.    The Prosecution responds that an aider and abettor need not be present at the location of the and argues that, in any event, the Trial Chamber found that Lazarević was in Priština/Prishtina  when the campaign of forcible displacement took place. The Prosecution further submits that regardless of the stated purpose of Lazarević’s visits, the Trial Chamber correctly regarded them “as evidence of moral support and encouragement in all of the troops’ activities, be it in legitimate combat or in the commission of crimes.” 
(ii) Analysis

1687.    The  Appeals  Chamber  recalls  that  for  aiding  and  abetting  liability  to  arise,  “the encouragement and moral support provided by the accused need not be explicit, and that, in certain circumstances, even the act of being present at the crime scene (or in its vicinity) as a ‘silent spectator’ can be construed as tacit approval or encouragement of the crime. The Appeals Chamber further recalls that:







In cases where tacit approval or encouragement has been found to be the basis for criminal responsibility, it has been the authority of the accused combined with his presence on (or very near to) the crime scene, especially if considered together with his prior conduct, which all together allow the conclusion that the accused’s conduct amounts to official sanction of the crime and thus substantially contributes to it. It follows that encouragement and moral support can only form a substantial contribution to a crime when the principal perpetrators are aware of it. 



1688.    The Trial Chamber concluded that Lazarević’s “presence in the field, inspecting VJ units that were involved in the commission of crimes against Kosovo Albanians, was expressly noted to improve the morale of soldiers.” The evidence the Trial Chamber explicitly cited in reaching this conclusion included two Priština Corps combat reports of 4 and 5 April 1999. These two combat reports confirmed that a number of Priština Corps units were visited and inspected by Lazarević and that,  during  these  visits,  the  “combat  morale”  was  assessed  and  subordinate  units  were “inform ed ”. The  combat  reports  further  indicated  that  “the  achieved  results”  in  combat operations and the “efficient defence and protection” against NATO attacks additionally motivated the troops and reinforced or strengthened “the combat morale” of the Priština Corps members. The Appeals Chamber observes that, contrary to the Trial Chamber’s finding, the combat reports contain no recognition of Lazarević’s conduct as having improved the morale of soldiers.

1689.    The Trial Chamber also considered evidence of Lazarević’s inspections of and visits to the units in the field. However, like the combat reports, this evidence does not indicate that Lazarević’s conduct was construed by the subordinate units as providing encouragement or moral support to the commission of any crime. The Appeals Chamber considers that it was incumbent upon the Trial Chamber to determine whether the VJ units construed Lazarević’s presence and inspections as specifically legitimising or encouraging the commission of the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer. Nothing in the evidence relied upon by the Trial Chamber supports such an inference. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that the only reasonable inference was that Lazarević’s inspection of the Priština Corps units provided encouragement and moral support to the perpetrators. Lazarević’s conduct in this respect could therefore not be considered as aiding and abetting the commission of deportation and forcible transfer by the VJ forces.

1690.    Based  on  the  foregoing,  the  Appeals  Chamber  grants  sub-grounds  3(e)  and  3(i)  of Lazarević’s appeal to the extent that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that his inspection of the VJ units  provided  encouragement  and  moral  support  to  the  VJ  forces  engaging  in  forcible displacement.
(g) Impact of the Appeals Chamber’s findings

1691.    The Appeals Chamber has overturned the Trial Chamber’s finding that: (i) Lazarević’s inspection of the VJ units provided encouragement and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in forcible displacement; and (ii) Lazarević’s failure to take adequate investigative and punitive measures substantially contributed to the commission of the crimes of forcible transfer and deportation by VJ forces. The impact of these findings, if any, on Lazarević’s sentence will be addressed below. 

1692.    The Appeals Chamber considers, however, that these errors have no impact on the Trial Chamber’s finding that Lazarević provided practical assistance to members of the VJ involved in the commission of forcible transfer and deportation and that this had a substantial effect on the commission of these crimes. In this context, the Appeals Chamber recalls that the Trial Chamber found that Lazarević participated in the planning and execution of the joint operations conducted by the VJ and thereby substantially contributed to the commission of the crimes by the VJ as such conduct provided assistance in terms of soldiers on the ground to carry out the acts, organising and equipping VJ units, and the provision of weaponry, including tanks, to assist these acts. The Appeals Chamber is satisfied that a reasonable trier of fact could have found that these acts had a substantial effect on the commission of deportation and forcible transfer.

1693.    The Appeals Chamber therefore finds that Lazarević has failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that he aided and abetted the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer through his involvement in the joint operations of the MUP and the VJ in 1999.
4. Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević fulfilled the mens rea of aiding and abetting

1694.    The Trial Chamber found that, in light of the information Lazarević received in 1998 on the commission of crimes against civilians and civilian property and on the humanitarian catastrophe resulting partly from the use of excessive force by the VJ and the MUP during their operations, Lazarević was “aware that similar excessive uses of force and forcible displacements were likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999.” 

1695.    The  Trial  Chamber  found  that  Lazarević  was  aware  of  the  campaign  of  forcible displacement carried out by the VJ and MUP forces throughout Kosovo during the NATO air campaign in 1999. The Trial Chamber noted that, as the Commander of the Priština Corps, Lazarević: (i) “was present in Kosovo where the campaign was being conducted by his subordinates acting together with the MUP”; (ii) was present in Priština/Prishtina throughout the period during which the VJ and the MUP, operating together, forcibly displaced large numbers of Kosovo Albanians and created an atmosphere of terror; (iii) showed his awareness of the previous forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians by Priština Corps members in his orders for the prevention of mistreatment of the civilian population; (iv) was informed about the massive displacement of the civilian  population  during  VJ  operations;  and  (v)  knew  of  the  locations  of  these  operations, including most of the locations named in the Indictment. 

1696.    The Trial Chamber further found that Lazarević was aware of the intentional commission of deportation and forcible transfer and knew that his conduct assisted in the commission of these crimes. Consequently, the Trial Chamber concluded that Lazarević possessed the requisite mens rea for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer committed by the VJ. 

1697.    Lazarević submits that in light of the evidence presented at trial, no reasonable trial chamber could have concluded that he fulfilled the mens rea of aiding and abetting. He claims in this respect that he was unaware of: (i) the campaign of forcible displacement; (ii) the state of mind of the physical or intermediary perpetrators; and (iii) the fact that his conduct assisted in the commission of the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer. 
(a) Alleged  errors  in  finding  that  Lazarević  was  aware  that  forcible  displacement  was  likely  to occur in 1999

1698.    The Trial Chamber found that Lazarević was aware of the commission of crimes against “civilians and civilian property during operations of the VJ and the MUP in 1998” and that “this had resulted in the displacement of a significant number of civilians.” The Trial Chamber was satisfied that Lazarević was aware of UN Security Council Resolution 1199 expressing serious concerns over the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by the Serbian security forces and the VJ, which had resulted in numerous civilian casualties and the displacement of over 230,000 civilians in 1998. It also found that: (i) Lazarević closely followed events on the ground in Kosovo while MUP and VJ forces used excessive and disproportionate force, and was aware of the existing “humanitarian catastrophe”; (ii) a number of Priština Corps documents indicated Lazarević’s awareness of the commission of crimes in 1998; and (iii) “Lazarević discussed the large  number  of  displaced  Kosovo  Albanians  and  their  return  during  meetings  of  the  Joint Command.” The Trial Chamber concluded that “Lazarević was aware that similar excessive uses of force and forcible displacements were likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999.” 
(i) Submissions of the parties

1699.    Lazarević contends that his awareness of the commission of crimes in 1998 was not proved beyond reasonable doubt and therefore he could not have been aware that excessive use of force and  forcible  displacement  were  likely  to  occur  if  he  ordered  the  VJ  to  operate  in  Kosovo in 1999. In this respect, he challenges the Trial Chamber’s finding that he was aware of the commission of crimes against civilians and civilian property during operations conducted by the VJ and the MUP in 1998 and that these crimes resulted in the displacement of a significant number of civilians. Lazarević argues that no evidence supports the Trial Chamber’s finding that he was aware of Resolution 1199 as the resolution was never received by the Priština Corps and certainly not at the Forward Command Post where he was stationed from April 1998 until the end of the year. He states that during his only contact with OSCE representatives in December 1998 no crimes committed by the VJ were mentioned. 

1700.    Lazarević  also  avers  that  the  Trial  Chamber  misinterpreted  the  minutes  of  the  Joint Command meetings, arguing that the purpose of the meetings was to discuss measures for the protection of displaced persons and that no crimes were mentioned at the five meetings which he attended. Lazarević contends that his interventions at these meetings show that he was there merely to present information concerning the situation on the state border and that he considered the population to have “temporarily  taken  refuge from the combat operations”. He also refers to the testimony of Sandra Mitchell that there was no refugee problem prior to 22 March 1999. 

1701.    Lazarević submits that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that a number of Priština Corps orders had a bearing on his awareness of the commission of crimes by the VJ in 1998. He argues that the orders were either geared towards the prevention of crimes in combat operations or to protect international observers and show that he had no knowledge of an approach to combat operations that would involve the commission of crimes. 

1702.    The Prosecution responds that Lazarević challenges isolated findings and ignores that the Trial Chamber considered the evidence as a whole. It further submits that the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević was aware of Resolution 1199 was reasonable in view of the involvement of VJ troops in the implementation of the October Agreements and Lazarević’s position as Chief of Staff of the Priština Corps. It argues that Lazarević’s challenges to the Trial Chamber’s reliance on the minutes of the Joint Command meetings should be summarily dismissed as he merely offers a  different interpretation of the evidence. Finally, the Prosecution contends that the Priština Corps  orders  pertaining  to  the  prevention  of  crimes  indicate  Lazarević’s  knowledge  of  prior incidents and that, in this regard, he seeks to re-argue his trial submissions. 
(ii) Analysis

1703.    The Trial Chamber considered that in 1998 Lazarević was aware of the humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo as described in Resolution 1199. In particular, it relied on Lazarević’s involvement in implementing obligations imposed on the VJ under the October Agreements, which were expressly based on Resolution 1199. The Trial Chamber was ultimately satisfied that Lazarević was aware of the resolution and its contents. 

1704.    The Appeals Chamber notes that Resolution 1199 expressed the Security Council’s grave concern for the “excessive and indiscriminate use of force by Serbian security forces and the Yugoslav Army which have resulted in numerous civilian casualties and  …  the displacement of over 230,000 persons from their homes”. Resolution 1199 also noted “reports of increasing violations of human rights and of international humanitarian law” and emphasised “the need to ensure that the rights of all inhabitants of Kosovo are respected.” 

1705.    The October Agreements, which were expressly based on Resolution 1199, stipulated, inter alia, the reduction of the VJ forces and equipment in Kosovo and the introduction of a verification mission. The  VJ  was  also  obliged  to  provide  weekly  detailed  reports  to  the  KVM. In addition, liaison units were established in the Priština Corps to facilitate the implementation of the October Agreements. The Appeals Chamber therefore considers that a reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that, as Chief of Staff of the Priština Corps in 1998, Lazarević was aware of the Resolution 1199 and its contents. The Appeals Chamber further considers that this conclusion is reasonable irrespective of whether the resolution itself was distributed within the Priština  Corps.  Moreover,  the  Trial  Chamber’s  finding  that  Lazarević  was  aware  of  the humanitarian catastrophe in Kosovo was also based on other evidence, including Lazarević’s attendance at the Joint Command meeting on 1 September 1998 in which Šainović drew attention to the “humanitarian catastrophe” in Kosovo. 

1706.    The Appeals Chamber is likewise not persuaded by Lazarević’s submission that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the Priština Corps Command order of 5 June 1998. This order not only ordered the prevention of theft of the property of Kosovo Albanians, but also the return of all property that had been stolen, providing a clear indication that looting had already taken place. Similarly, the Priština Corps Command order of 7 August 1998 recognised that some units had “overused combat equipment the consequence of which was greater damage to buildings” and that a large number of houses were destroyed and torched. The order also instructed the return of all stolen goods. 

1707.    The Trial Chamber expressly considered and rejected Lazarević’s explanation that his order of 10 July 1998 was meant to protect international observers. The order held that VJ units should not open fire in response to KLA provocations in the presence of international observers and that in the event that the use of force was required, it must not be excessive. The Trial Chamber concluded that the order demonstrated that Lazarević knew of the risk that the Priština Corps units would “over-react” to KLA provocations and thereby commit crimes. The Appeals Chamber notes that the stated aim of the order was to prevent “units of the Corps from opening uncontrolled and unnecessary fire at šiptar terrorists” in view of the fact that the KLA were “trying to provoke units of the VJ to open fire in  the  presence  of international observers  in order to show the world how much they  were  threatened”. The order made no reference to protecting international observers from combat fire. Lazarević’s argument is therefore without merit.

1708.    The Trial Chamber also took into consideration that several joint operations were conducted in the border area between Albania and Kosovo when Lazarević was stationed at the Forward Command Post and that during those operations the MUP and VJ forces used excessive or disproportionate  force. It  also  considered  that  Lazarević  was  present  at  a  meeting  on 7 August 1998 in which Samard`ić stated that fighting terrorism by torching was “a disgrace”, and at a Joint Command meeting on 1 September 1998 in which Šainović noted the “humanitarian catastrophe” in Kosovo and emphasised that actions were to be carried out “in a disciplined manner, in order to avoid arson”. The Trial Chamber also found that Lazarević knew about the alleged involvement  of  the  MUP  in  the  killing  of  civilians  in  Gornje  Obrinje/Abria  e  Epërme  in October 1998 and   of   the   VJ’s   use   of   disproportionate   force   on   8 January 1999   in Slapu`ane/Slapuzhan village. The Appeals Chamber considers that Lazarević has failed to show that a reasonable trier of fact could not have relied in part on this evidence in finding that Lazarević was aware that crimes were committed against civilians and civilian property in 1998 and early 1999. In addition, the Trial Chamber considered that the large number of displaced Kosovo Albanians and their return were discussed during Joint Command meetings in September 1998 which Lazarević attended. Irrespective of why Lazarević attended these meetings or what he said there, the information conveyed at these meetings supports the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that he  was  aware of  the  displacement of  a  significant number of  Kosovo Albanians in 1998. Lazarević’s submission that he believed the population had “temporarily  taken  refuge from the combat operations” merely presents a different interpretation of the evidence without showing any error on the part of the Trial Chamber. 

1709.    Nonetheless, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding based on his knowledge of events in 1998 that the only reasonable inference was that Lazarević was aware that forcible displacement was likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999. In this regard, the Appeals Chamber notes that the Trial Chamber did not find that forcible displacement took place in 1998, or that Lazarević was aware that VJ forces were acting with the intent to displace the Kosovo Albanian population in the course of their military operations. While  the  use  of  excessive  and  indiscriminate  force,  killings  of  civilians,  and  destruction  of property  may  be  means  to  displace  the  population,  such  acts  do  not  per  se  mean  that  the perpetrators  of  these  acts  intended  to  forcibly  displace  the  population,  even  if  they  effect  a movement of the population. The Appeals Chamber therefore considers that, at most, the information Lazarević received in 1998 made him aware of the probability that the VJ forces would use excessive and indiscriminate force or commit other crimes if ordered to operate in Kosovo in 1999. However, the Appeals Chamber finds that on the basis of such knowledge alone no reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that the only reasonable inference was that Lazarević knew of the probability that if ordered to operate in Kosovo in 1999, the VJ forces would act with the intent to commit deportation and forcible transfer.

1710.    In light of the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber dismisses sub-ground 3(b) of Lazarević’s appeal and grants sub-ground 3(i) of Lazarević’s appeal to the extent that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that as of January 1999, he had the requisite mens rea for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer committed by the VJ forces in Kosovo between 24 March and 25 May 1999.
(b) Alleged errors in finding that Lazarević knew of the campaign of forcible displacement
(i) Lazarević’s presence in Priština/Prishtina in 1999

1711.    The Trial Chamber found that from 24 March 1999 the VJ and the MUP operated together for some weeks, forcibly displacing large numbers of Kosovo Albanian civilians from Priština/Prishtina. It further found that Lazarević was present in Priština/Prishtina  for most of this period and was therefore aware of the forcible displacement and the atmosphere of terror created by the VJ and MUP forces. The Trial Chamber was also satisfied that Lazarević attended at least one meeting in Priština/Prishtina  while Kosovo Albanians were being forcibly displaced from the town, and was present at the 1 June 1999 Joint Command meeting at the Grand Hotel. 

1712.    According  to  Lazarević,  the  Trial  Chamber  reached  its  findings  on  his  presence  in Priština/Prishtina  and on his awareness of the forcible displacement solely on the basis of his attendance of two meetings held on 20 April and 1 June 1999. Lazarević contends that, contrary to the Trial Chamber’s finding, he was in the “region of Priština, which means several kilometers sic   from Priština”. He also avers that the evidence does not show that on 20 April 1999 Kosovo Albanians were being forcibly displaced from the town of Priština/Prishtina. Finally, Lazarević argues that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the meeting that took place on 1 June 1999 was a meeting of the Joint Command. 

1713.    The Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber relied on several pieces of evidence in finding that Lazarević was present in Priština/Prishtina during the relevant period. According to the Prosecution, Lazarević’s claim that the meeting on 1 June 1999 was not a Joint Command meeting should be summarily dismissed since it is irrelevant to the question of whether he was present in the town. The Prosecution also submits that Lazarević fails to explain why the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that he was aware of the crimes committed in Priština/Prishtina. 

1714.    The Trial Chamber found that “Lazarević was primarily located in and around Priština/Prishtina  during the NATO air campaign.” The Trial Chamber noted that the Priština Corps  Command  was  located  in  1999  in  Priština/Prishtina  town  and  that,  on  30 March 1999, Lazarević ordered members of the Priština Corps Command to be located “in the general area of the Priština municipality, the Municipal Court and the premises of the  Priština Corps  Command including the Grand Hotel”. The Trial Chamber also considered evidence that Lazarević was present at the Priština Corps Command at the Grand Hotel in Priština/Prishtina town “almost every day” and that, together with his team, he “moved constantly” between the Priština Corps main Command Post, its Rear Command Post, the Forward Command Post, and several Command Groups throughout Kosovo. The evidence cited by Lazarević is consistent with the Trial Chamber’s finding that he was “primarily located in and around Priština/Prishtina”. 

1715.    The Trial Chamber considered evidence showing that “Kosovo Albanians were expelled from Priština/Prishtina town beginning on 24 March 1999” and that thousands of Kosovo Albanians left their homes in Priština/Prishtina either as the result of direct eviction or due to the prevailing atmosphere of fear caused by the organised actions of the VJ and the MUP “in the days and weeks following the start of the airstrikes”. Thus, irrespective of whether any specific acts of deportation  or  forcible  transfer  occurred  at  the  time  of  the  20 April  1999  meeting,  the  Trial Chamber reasonably found that Lazarević was regularly present in Priština/Prishtina during the period of the NATO air campaign when the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer were taking place. Consequently, the Appeals Chamber finds no error in the Trial Chamber’s finding that due to his presence, Lazarević was aware of the forcible displacement and the atmosphere of terror created by the VJ and MUP forces.

1716.    Finally, with respect to Lazarević’s claim that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that the meeting on 1 June 1999 in the Grand Hotel was one of the Joint Command, the Appeals Chamber considers that the alleged error is irrelevant to the issue of Lazarević’s presence in Priština/Prishtina town on this date, which he does not appear to dispute.

1717.    In light of the above, the Appeals Chamber dismisses sub-ground 3(e) of Lazarević’s appeal.
(ii) Lazarević’s knowledge of crimes committed in 1999

1718.    The Trial Chamber concluded that Lazarević knew of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement carried out by the VJ and MUP forces against Kosovo Albanians in 1999. It found that Lazarević was aware of specific crimes committed by members of Priština Corps units, serious violent acts committed by MUP members against Kosovo Albanians, and the widespread forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population in 1999, which was at least in part due to the actions of the VJ. 

1719.    The Trial Chamber relied, inter alia, on: (i) reports sent by subordinate units to the Priština Corps Command on the commission of crimes by VJ members; (ii) combat reports on the massive displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population as well as documents issued by the Priština Corps Command and its subordinate units pertaining to measures undertaken regarding civilians; (iii) a warning of 25 April 1999 by Ljubiša Diković that the Priština Corps was using excessive   tactics   during   operations   in   and   around   Kosmač   and   Čičavica/Qiqavica; (iv) Drewienkiewicz’s press statement reporting that VJ and MUP forces were responsible for the deportation of the Kosovo Albanian population in early April 1999; (v) Lazarević’s awareness that  the  operation  in  the  Reka/Caragoj  valley  in  the  end  of  April  1999  involved  forcible displacement  of  the  civilian  population; and  (vi)  “Lazarević’s  attempt  to  prevent  the mistreatment of Kosovo Albanians by VJ members”. The Trial Chamber further noted evidence that orders for the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians, and related reports, were not written but given orally. 

1720.    Lazarević  challenges  the  Trial  Chamber’s  evaluation  of  this  evidence.  The  Appeals Chamber will address his submissions in turn.
a. Reports on the commission of crimes sent by subordinate units

1721.    The Trial Chamber considered evidence showing that in 1999, the reporting system within the Priština Corps did not always work well and that reports were not being received as often as they should have been. It concluded, however, that despite some disruptions, communications continued to function, allowing the continued operation of the Priština Corps Command system. The Trial Chamber further found that several documents sent by subordinate units to the Priština Corps Command informed Lazarević about crimes committed by members of Priština Corps units and  noted  that  while  these  documents  indicated  that  measures  had  been  taken  against  the perpetrators of crimes, they did not provide details on the measures taken. 

1722.    Lazarević argues that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that throughout the NATO air campaign the Priština Corps Command functioned continuously. According to Lazarević, the evidence shows that, on occasion, “commanding and communication were blocked for a period of several days.” He further avers that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the fact that reports sent to the Priština Corps Command did not provide details on the measures taken against the perpetrators of  crimes. In  support  of  his  submission,  Lazarević  refers  to  the  evidence  of  Aleksandar Vasiljević that it was not necessary for the combat reports to be detailed. He maintains that the lack of prosecutions shows that he did not know that forcible displacement was taking place and that his mere knowledge that individual members of the Priština Corps had committed criminal offences does not prove that he was aware of a widespread and systematic campaign of forcible displacement. 

1723.    The Prosecution responds that the evidence upon which Lazarević seeks to rely as to the difficulties and partial breakdown of communications does not contradict the Trial Chamber’s finding that the Priština Corps Command functioned continuously. The Prosecution contends that it is irrelevant whether the reports of the Priština Corps included details of measures taken against the perpetrators of crimes. In addition, the Prosecution claims that Lazarević misrepresents Vasiljević’s testimony. 

1724.    The Trial Chamber took into account evidence that “there were some disruptions in the communications system” within the Priština Corps Command. The evidence cited by Lazarević does not undermine this finding or show that the communication problems had the effect of actually halting the function of the Priština Corps Command. 

1725.    The Trial Chamber also noted that the combat reports lacked details on measures taken against the perpetrators of crimes. The Appeals Chamber observes that there is no indication that the Trial Chamber placed undue weight on this aspect of the evidence. Rather, the Trial Chamber relied on the combat reports to find that Lazarević was aware of the commission of crimes by his subordinates, including rape and looting. 

1726.    The Appeals Chamber also finds unpersuasive Lazarević’s arguments regarding his knowledge of individual incidents of crimes and the lack of criminal prosecutions. The Trial Chamber considered Lazarević’s knowledge of instances of crimes, such as looting, theft, and rape committed by the VJ and murder, rape, and looting committed by MUP members in conjunction with his awareness of the massive displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population, including of the forcible displacement carried out during the Reka/Caragoj valley operation on 27 and 28 April 1999. The Trial Chamber also found that Lazarević was aware of the situation in Kosovo as he was primarily located in and around Priština/Prishtina while the campaign of forcible displacement was being carried out and frequently travelled to inspect his subordinate units in the field. Lazarević’s submission that the Trial Chamber only relied on his knowledge that individual members of the Priština Corps had committed criminal offences to infer his knowledge of the campaign of forcible displacement is therefore without merit.
b. Lazarević’s awareness that the operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley involved forcible displacement

1727.    The Trial Chamber found that the joint VJ and MUP operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley on 27 and 28 April 1999 “was an organised operation primarily designed to displace the Kosovo Albanian civilian population down the valley.” It further found that Lazarević was aware that the operation  involved  the  forcible  displacement  of  the  civilian  population. In  reaching  these conclusions, the Trial Chamber relied on K73’s testimony that the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians during the operation was carried out pursuant to orders as well as on K90’s evidence that such orders would have been approved at a higher level than that of a brigade commander, such as Bo`idar Delić. The Trial Chamber noted that Lazarević was Delić’s immediate supervisor. It also considered that Dragan Živanović, who was involved in the operation, testified that he had reported to Lazarević about the operation the following day. The Trial Chamber further noted the evidence of Saša Antić, a Commander in the 52nd Military Police Battalion of the VJ, on an unrelated military action that “‘it would be insane to think that even a chief of security would issue an order to a unit without approval and without the knowledge of the corps commander’”. 

1728.    Lazarević claims that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the testimonies of K73 and K90 and consequently erred in finding that he was aware that the operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley involved the forcible displacement of the civilian population. Lazarević further seeks to rely on the evidence of K73 that Lazarević was a professional and honourable military commander. 

1729.       The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s argument should be summarily dismissed as he fails to show that the Trial Chamber erred in relying on the evidence of K90 and K73. It further submits that Lazarević’s reference to K73’s evidence that he was an honourable soldier is irrelevant to the assessment of whether he knew that the VJ forcibly displaced Kosovo Albanian civilians. 

1730.       Lazarević merely claims that the Trial Chamber misinterpreted the evidence of K90 without identifying any specific error in the Trial Chamber’s evaluation. The Appeals Chamber recalls that it has already dismissed Lazarević’s general challenge to the Trial Chamber’s reliance on the evidence of K90. Similarly, Lazarević has failed to point to any specific error in relation to the Trial Chamber’s evaluation of the evidence of K73. As to the testimony of K73 concerning the general professionalism of Lazarević as a military commander, the Appeals Chamber considers it to
be irrelevant to the question of whether Lazarević was aware that the operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley involved forcible displacement. Lazarević’s arguments are therefore dismissed.
c.   Diković’s warning

1731.      The Trial Chamber noted that on 25 April 1999, Ljubiša Diković, the commander of the

37th Motorised Brigade, “warned Lazarević  …   that the Priština Corps was using excessive tactics which did not make military sense in operations in and around Kosmač and Čičavica/Qiqavica.” ć avers that the Trial Chamber erroneously relied on Diković’s warning which concerned only combat action against the KLA and did not refer to the moving of civilians. The Prosecution responds that the Appeals Chamber should summarily dismiss Lazarević’s argument since “he merely seeks to substitute his own evaluation of the evidence for that of the Trial Chamber.” 

1732.      The Appeals Chamber notes that Diković’s report does not suggest that the operations in and around Kosmač and Čičavica/Qiqavica resulted in the movement of civilians. Consequently, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred to the extent it relied on this report in
finding that Lazarević was aware of the forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population.
d.   Drewienkiewicz’s press statement

1733.      The Trial Chamber found that in early 1999 Lazarević was alerted by the international community to the forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population through the press statement  of  Karol  John  Drewienkiewicz, former  Kosovo  Verification  Mission  Chief  of
Operations and Deputy Head of Mission. 

1734.       Lazarević disputes the Trial Chamber’s finding, arguing that the evidence cited by the Trial Chamber  does  not  support  the  conclusion  that  he  was  aware  of  Drewenkiewicz’s  press statement. In  response,  the  Prosecution  contends  that  the  Trial  Chamber’s  conclusion  was correct, given the general subject-matter of the press statement and that such information would have been reported to Lazarević. The Prosecution also asserts that some of the crimes referred to in the press release were committed in Priština/Prishtina where Lazarević was located and contends that Drewienkiewicz was well known to the FRY and Serbian authorities. 

1735.      In concluding that Lazarević was made aware of Drewenkiewicz’s press statement, the Trial

Chamber reasoned that:







Drewienkiewicz’s press release reported large numbers of displaced Kosovo Albanians arriving at the borders, and conveyed reports of widespread atrocities committed by the VJ and MUP, including deportation. As described in Section VI.A, the Priština Corps had an intelligence department, responsible for reporting such information to the Commander. Furthermore, the press release specifically referred to the systematic looting and forcible removal of Kosovo Albanians from Priština/Prishtina, where Lazarević was located during the conflict. Given the subject matter of Drewienkiewicz’s press release and his notoriety to the FRY and Serbian authorities, the Chamber is satisfied that Lazarević was made aware of this report at the start of April 1999. 





1736.      The Trial Chamber considered evidence that the Priština Corps Staff consisted of various specialised departments or sections, including “Intelligence”. However, the Trial Chamber did not determine the scope of the department’s duties and functions. Nor does the evidence to which it referred substantiate its conclusion that Drewenkiewicz’s press statement would have fallen within the scope of the intelligence information usually gathered and reported to Lazarević. Absent such evidence, the Appeals Chamber considers that the subject matter of the press statement and Drewienkiewicz’s notoriety were insufficient for a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the only reasonable inference from the evidence was that Lazarević was made aware of Drewienkiewicz’s press statement. Nor is the Appeals Chamber persuaded by the Prosecution’s submission that due to his presence in Priština/Prishtina Lazarević would have been aware of the press statement. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber erred in relying on Drewienkiewicz’s press statement to infer that Lazarević knew of the commission of crimes by the VJ forces.
e.   Alleged error in finding that orders for forcible displacement were given orally

1737.      The Trial Chamber noted that orders for the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians were issued orally. It added that “ i t is consistent with this that a review of several combat reports from subordinate units did not include information regarding crimes and the widespread forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians”. 

1738.       Lazarević contends that the Trial Chamber’s finding that orders for the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians and reports thereabout were given orally is not supported by the evidence. He claims that the lack of such reports cannot support the conclusion that orders were given orally. In support of his submission, Lazarević seeks to rely on orders prohibiting criminal conduct and on the testimony of Zlatomir Pešić that Lazarević never issued an illegal order. 

1739.       The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s arguments should be summarily dismissed as he seeks to substitute his own evaluation of the evidence for that of the Trial Chamber and merely challenges the Trial Chamber’s failure to rely on Pešić’s testimony. 

1740.      The Trial Chamber found that orders for the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians were issued orally based on K90’s statement that his unit was ordered to expel Kosovo Albanians from their villages and that “there were never any written orders for these types of taskings  sic ”. K90 further stated that “a commander would not order the expulsion of innocent Albanian civilians in a written order but rather pass the order down verbally.” The Trial Chamber also noted that, in his testimony, K90 stated that although he was never ordered to expel villagers, “if you’re clearing up a village, you’re expelling these people”. The Trial Chamber found K90 “generally credible and reliable on the issues from his witness statement that he re-confirmed in his oral evidence.” The Trial Chamber further considered that the fact that orders for forcible displacement were given orally was consistent with the absence of information on forcible displacement in combat reports from subordinate units. The Appeals Chamber considers that Lazarević merely seeks to rely on a different interpretation of the evidence without showing that the Trial Chamber’s reliance on K90’s evidence was unreasonable.

1741.       Furthermore, Lazarević’s reliance on Pešić’s testimony that he had never received an illegal order from Lazarević is unpersuasive. The Appeals Chamber considers that Lazarević has failed to show the relevance of this evidence to his conviction. In this regard, the Appeals Chamber recalls that Lazarević was convicted for aiding and abetting, not ordering, the crimes of deportation and forcible transfer committed by the VJ. Lazarević’s submission in this regard is dismissed.
f.   Alleged error in finding that Lazarević’s attempt to prevent the mistreatment of Kosovo Albanians showed knowledge of forcible displacement

1742.     The Trial Chamber considered that, in addition to the evidence showing Lazarević’s knowledge of various crimes committed by the VJ and the MUP, “Lazarević’s attempt to prevent the mistreatment of Kosovo Albanians by VJ members, shows that he was aware of the VJ and MUP forcibly displacing Kosovo Albanian civilians, and also aware that this sometimes occurred during VJ operations against the KLA and in places where NATO was bombing VJ and MUP
targets”. 

1743.      Lazarević claims that no reasonable trier of fact could have inferred from his attempts to prevent the mistreatment of civilians that he knew of the campaign of forcible displacement. 

1744.      The Trial Chamber did not specify what it meant by Lazarević’s attempt to prevent the mistreatment of Kosovo Albanians by VJ members. The Appeals Chamber notes the Trial Chamber’s finding that “ t he orders issued by the Priština Corps Command prohibiting acts of
looting and other forms of crime constitute further evidence that Lazarević knew that such crimes were being committed during combat operations.” Of the evidence referred to by the Trial Chamber in this regard, the orders of 20 and 24 April 1999 originate from the Military District Command, not the Priština Corps Command, and hence are not of direct relevance. The Priština Corps Command order of 22 April 1999 contains no reference to crimes and the orders of
29 April and 7 May 1999 refer to the “frequent occurrence” or “daily occurrence” of “unsoldierly” behaviour  on  the  part  of  some  VJ  members,  without  specifying  what  is  meant  by  such behaviour. 

1745.      The Trial Chamber also considered Priština  Corps Command orders dated 1 April and
 6 May 1999, ordering the prevention of torching of houses and buildings, looting and theft, and “mistreatment and persecution” of civilians. The Appeals Chamber notes that while these documents indicate that Lazarević was aware of the previous commission of such crimes and mistreatment, this evidence is insufficient in itself to support the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević was aware of the forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanian civilians. The Trial Chamber also  considered  Lazarević’s  orders  of  16 April,  19 April,  22 April,  23 April,  and  2  May 1999 pertaining to the relocation, protection, and return of civilians. The Trial Chamber specifically found that in his order of 23 April 1999, Lazarević indicated that he was aware of the previous forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians by members of the Priština Corps. The Appeals Chamber notes that the order required the commanders of the brigades to “ t ake in, accommodate
and  protect  the  civilian  population”  and  “ p revent  any  misconduct,  especially  in  the  lower command structure with regard to the civilian population (banning return to inhabited places and so on)”. However, there is no explicit recognition of past forcible displacement in the order. Similarly, Lazarević’s orders of 16 April, 19 April, 22 April, and 2 May 1999 indicate that he was aware of the displacement of civilians, but contain no acknowledgment of the commission of crimes, including forcible displacement. 

1746.       The Appeals Chamber however recalls that the Trial Chamber did not rely on these orders alone, or in isolation, to find that Lazarević was aware of the forcible displacement carried out by the VJ and MUP forces. Rather, the Trial Chamber considered this evidence in conjunction with other evidence demonstrating his knowledge of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement. Such other evidence showed, inter alia, that: (i) Lazarević was present on the ground in Kosovo throughout the relevant period, including in Priština town during part of the period when residents of the town were being forcibly removed; and (ii) he was informed in reports from his subordinate  units  of  the  commission  of  crimes  during  operations  as  well  as  the  massive
displacement of the civilian population and that this was due in part to fear of the VJ and MUP. In these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber considers that Lazarević has failed to show that the Trial Chamber erred in considering his orders for the prevention of crimes and mistreatment of Kosovo Albanian civilians as further evidence supporting the conclusion that he was aware of the
forcible displacement committed by the VJ and the MUP.
g.   Reports  from  subordinate  units  on  measures  in  relation  to  the  civilian population

1747.      The Trial Chamber found that reports “pertaining to the measures undertaken regarding civilians” sent by subordinate units to the Priština Corps Command demonstrated that Lazarević was aware of the massive displacement of the civilian population. It also found that some reports indicated the compliance of subordinate units with Priština Corps Command orders pertaining to the relocation, protection, and return of civilians in certain areas in Kosovo. The Trial Chamber concluded, however, that none of these reports related to the sites where it has been proved that
forcible displacement was committed by the VJ. 

1748.       Lazarević contends that the reports he received showed that Kosovo Albanians left the zone of combat operations for reasons which were legitimate under international humanitarian law. He argues that the information he received indicated that civilians were being moved as a result of KLA actions or to avoid combat operations or NATO bombing and claims that the involvement of the VJ in the movement was in fact a legitimate effort to protect civilians and channel them into safe  areas. Lazarević  submits  that  the  lack  of  reporting  on  the  expulsion  of  the  civilian population indicates that he was unaware of its occurrence. 

1749.       The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s challenges should be summarily dismissed since “he merely seeks to substitute his own evaluation of the evidence without showing any error” on the part of the Trial Chamber. It adds that the Trial Chamber specifically rejected the contention that civilians were merely fleeing the zone of combat. 

1750.      The Trial Chamber relied, inter alia, on: (i) a combat report from the 37th Motorised Brigade stating that the unit expected to encounter shelters with several thousand civilian refugees and requesting  instructions  on  how  to  deal  with  the  situation; (ii)  a  combat  report  from  the
252nd Armoured Brigade stating that aid had been distributed to refugees; (iii) a combat report
from  the  252nd   Armoured  Brigade  stating  that  between  2,000  and  3,000  refugees  had  been discovered and that the KLA were using civilians as human shields; (iv) a combat report from the 211th Armoured Brigade requesting the provision of humanitarian aid to refugees; (v) a combat report from the 52nd Mixed Artillery Brigade stating that there were many civilians in Gnjilane and that there were “no sectors available to put up civilians”; (vi) a combat report from the 354th Infantry Brigade stating that approximately 50,000 refugees had been relocated; and (vii) a combat report from the 354th Infantry Brigade stating that about 15,000 refugees had been accommodated. In view of this evidence, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Trial Chamber did not err in finding that Lazarević was aware of the massive displacement of the civilian population
in 1999.

1751.      The   Trial   Chamber  further   referred  to   a   combat   report   of   3 April 1999   by   the
549th Motorised  Brigade  Command  stating  that   from   24   March  to   2   April  1999,   over 300,0000 Kosovo Albanians had crossed the border into Albania and that this was at least in part due to fear of the VJ and the MUP. The report also stated that Kosovo Albanians were not fearful of the VJ when it was acting alone. The Appeals Chamber considers that a reasonable trier of fact could have relied on this evidence in finding that Lazarević was aware of the massive displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population in 1999 and that it was at least in part due to the joint actions of the VJ and the MUP. 

1752.       In  challenging  the  Trial  Chamber’s  conclusion  that  he  was  aware  of  the  campaign  of forcible displacement, Lazarević further seeks to rely on the Trial Chamber’s finding that some reports indicated the compliance of subordinate units with Priština Corps Command orders pertaining to the relocation, protection, and return of civilians in certain areas in Kosovo. However, the Trial Chamber found that such reports did not relate to the sites where forcible
displacement had been committed by the VJ. Lazarević has failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in this regard.

1753.       The Trial Chamber further considered the fact that VJ combat reports did not expressly refer to the forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population in certain locations. The Trial Chamber noted that this was consistent with evidence showing that orders for the expulsion of Kosovo Albanians were not written, but were provided orally. It also considered that the reports sent by the 125th Motorised Brigade on the joint VJ and MUP operation in the Reka/Caragoj valley did not report any crimes, although the evidence demonstrated the widespread forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population there, and that Lazarević was aware thereof. The Appeals Chamber finds that in these circumstances, a reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that the absence of information in combat reports on forcible displacements in some of the crime sites where VJ operations had taken place did not raise any doubt as to Lazarević’s knowledge of the
campaign of forcible displacement. Lazarević’s arguments are thus dismissed.
(iii)   Conclusion

1754.       The Appeals Chamber finds that in concluding that Lazarević was aware of the VJ and the MUP forcibly displacing Kosovo Albanian civilians in 1999, the Trial Chamber erred in relying on Diković’s  warning  and  Drewienkiewicz’s  press  statement.  Accordingly,  the  Appeals  Chamber grants sub-grounds 3(f) and 3(i) of Lazarević’s appeal in relevant part.

1755.      The Appeals Chamber observes, however, that in concluding that Lazarević was aware of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement, the Trial Chamber considered further evidence, such as: (i) Lazarević’s presence in Kosovo and particularly in Priština/Prishtina for most of the time the forcible displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population was taking place; (ii) Lazarević’s awareness of the massive scale of the displacement of the civilian population in the course of VJ operations in 1999 and that this displacement was due in part to fear of the VJ and the MUP; (iii) Lazarević’s knowledge of the locations of the VJ operations, including at most of the locations named in the Indictment as well as his specific knowledge that the Reka/Caragoj valley operation in late April involved forcible displacement of the civilian population; (iv) Lazarević’s awareness of the commission of serious crimes against Kosovo Albanian civilians during operations as reported to him by his subordinate units; and (v) Lazarević’s orders to his units for the prevention  of  crimes  and  mistreatment  of  Kosovo  Albanians  civilians. Consequently,  the Appeals Chamber finds that, notwithstanding the Trial Chamber’s factual errors, a reasonable trier
of fact could have concluded that the only reasonable inference from the evidence is that, as of 24 March 1999 when the first crimes in Priština/Prishtina took place, Lazarević was aware of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement carried out by VJ and MUP forces against the Kosovo Albanian population. Therefore, the Appeals Chamber dismisses the relevant parts of sub-grounds 3(f) and 3(h)-(i) of Lazarević’s appeal.
(c)   Lazarević’s orders for the protection of civilians

1756.      The Trial Chamber considered a number of orders issued by Lazarević pertaining to the relocation, protection, and return of civilians. It noted that “although these measures show that
Lazarević was aware of the widespread relocation of the Kosovo Albanian population by VJ forces, they also indicate that he attempted to have this done in a non-violent way, without abuses of the displaced people.” 

1757.      Lazarević argues that the Trial Chamber reached contradictory findings by stating that he attempted to use VJ forces to relocate the Kosovo Albanian civilians in a non-violent way and that he also aided and abetted their deportation and forcible transfer. In this regard, Lazarević refers to his orders of 1 April, 16 April, 19 April, 22 April, 23 April, 2 May, 6 May, and 25 May 1999 as examples of the special provisions he made to protect the civilian population, enable their return, and prevent crimes against civilians during operations. He also cites a number of documents, which he claims demonstrate that subordinate units followed these orders. 

1758.     The Prosecution responds that the Trial Chamber correctly placed limited weight on Lazarević’s orders for the protection of civilians. It further claims that the Trial Chamber’s finding that Lazarević attempted to relocate civilians in a non-violent manner “does not relate to the forcible  character  of  the  displacements  per  se  but  to  additional  abuses  of  the  people  that accompanied their expulsion.” 

1759.      The Appeals Chamber notes that the Trial Chamber specifically referred to Lazarević’s orders of 16 April, 19 April, 22 April, 23 April, and 2 May 1999 pertaining to the relocation, protection, and return of civilians. The Trial Chamber also referred to Lazarević’s orders of
1 April  and  6 May 1999  prohibiting acts  of  looting  and  other  forms  of  crimes. The  Trial Chamber further addressed a number of reports from subordinate units to the Priština Corps Command showing that, in some parts of Kosovo, the units complied with orders for the protection of civilians. It noted, however, that none of the reports on the large number of displaced Kosovo
Albanians and the VJ involvement in their movement and care related to the locations where forcible displacement had taken place. Lazarević repeats verbatim his trial submissions without showing that the Trial Chamber failed to consider the relevant evidence. 

1760.     The Appeals Chamber further finds unpersuasive Lazarević’s contention that the Trial Chamber reached contradictory findings by stating that he attempted to use VJ forces to relocate the Kosovo Albanian civilians in a non-violent way and that he also aided and abetted their forcible displacement. The Appeals Chamber recalls that an aider and abettor need not possess the intent to further the crime but only knowledge that his acts or omissions assist the commission of such crime. The Trial Chamber found it significant that, despite the orders to protect civilians in combat areas, Lazarević continued to order joint VJ and MUP operations in Kosovo and VJ units continued  to  be  involved  in  the  forcible  displacement  of  Kosovo  Albanian  civilians. The Appeals Chamber has found no error in the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević was aware of the widespread forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanians and that this was at least in part due to the actions of the VJ. Moreover, none of the reports from subordinate units complying with Lazarević’s orders for the protection of the civilian population related to the locations where forcible displacement had taken place. In light of these considerations, the Appeals Chamber finds that a reasonable trier of fact could have relied on Lazarević’s orders in relation to the protection of civilians in a limited manner and finds no contradiction in the Trial Chamber’s findings in this regard. The Appeals Chamber therefore dismisses Lazarević’s arguments.
d)   Whether Lazarević knew that his conduct assisted forcible displacement

1761.      Lazarević argues that he attended only a small number of Joint Command meetings and always insisted that the international community be informed about the situation on the ground in Kosovo and that of the civilian population. Consequently, Lazarević maintains that he was not aware that his acts or omissions were assisting in the commission of crimes by the members of the
Joint Command, who were also found to be JCE members. The Prosecution responds that
Lazarević’s argument fails to address the Trial Chambers finding that he knew of the crimes committed by the VJ and the MUP and that he assisted in the commission of those crimes. 

1762.       The Appeals Chamber finds Lazarević’s argument unpersuasive. Lazarević’s submissions in this respect fail to address the large evidentiary basis considered by the Trial Chamber and its reasoning in finding that he was aware that the VJ forcibly displaced Kosovo Albanian civilians during operations against the KLA and that consequently he was aware that his conduct enabling the   forces   to   engage   in   such   operations   thereby   assisted   the   commission   of   forcible
displacement. It was this knowledge, together with the provision of assistance to members of the VJ who were involved in the commission of forcible transfer and deportation, that led the Trial Chamber to conclude that Lazarević knew that his conduct contributed to the commission of crimes. Moreover, the Trial Chamber’s reasoning does not suggest that Lazarević’s knowledge that his conduct assisted in the commission of crimes by the VJ was limited to members of the VJ who were also found to be JCE members.

1763.      In light of the foregoing, the Appeals Chamber dismisses sub-ground 3(i) of Lazarević’s appeal in relevant part. 
(e)   Conclusion

1764.       In view of the above considerations, the Appeals Chamber finds that Lazarević has failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in finding that he was aware of the commission of the crimes of forcible transfer and deportation by the VJ and that he knew that his conduct assisted the commission of these crimes.
5.   Conclusion

1765.      For the foregoing reasons, the Appeals Chamber concludes that Lazarević has failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in finding him responsible for aiding and abetting, pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute, the crimes of deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) (under Counts 1 and 2 of the Indictment). Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber upholds his convictions in this regard, except for his convictions for the crimes committed in Kačanik/Kaçanik town, Turićevac/Turiçec village, and Tušilje/Tushila. The Appeals Chamber recalls in this respect that it has found that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that the VJ forcibly displaced Kosovo
Albanians from Kačanik/Kaçanik town and Turićevac/Turiçec village. The Appeals Chamber has  also  found  that  Lazarević  suffered  prejudice  due  to  the  omission  of  the  incident  in
Tušilje/Tushila from the Indictment and the resulting lack of notice. 

1766.      The Appeals Chamber further recalls that it has found that the Trial Chamber erred in failing to apply its own factual findings that the VJ was involved in the commission of the crimes of deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) in villages in Kosovska Mitrovica/Mitrovica, Prizren, and Uroševac/Ferizaj municipalities, and consequently acquitting Lazarević of aiding and abetting these crimes. However, in the circumstances of the present case, the Appeals Chamber, Judge Ramaroson dissenting, declines to enter new convictions on appeal in relation to the forcible displacement committed in these three locations. 
C.    Alleged errors in acquitting Lazarević of aiding and abetting murder
1.   Introduction

1767.      The Trial Chamber found that “ w hile forcible displacements were part of the VJ and MUP organised campaign”, it was not satisfied that “killings  …  were intended aims of this campaign.” For this reason, despite finding that Lazarević was aware of VJ members killing Kosovo Albanians in some instances, the Trial Chamber concluded that he was not aware “that VJ and MUP forces were going into the specific crime sites  …  in order to commit killings  … ”. The Trial Chamber thus found that, with respect to Lazarević, the mental element of aiding and abetting was not established in relation to the charges of murder as a crime against humanity, murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war, and murder as an underlying act of persecution
as a crime against humanity. Consequently, Lazarević was acquitted of these charges. 

1768.      The Prosecution submits that the Trial Chamber erred in law in relation to the mens rea standard of aiding and abetting. It contends, in the alternative, that if the Trial Chamber applied the correct legal test, then it erred in fact by acquitting Lazarević of aiding and abetting murder, since no reasonable trial chamber could have concluded, based on the findings made, that the mental element of aiding and abetting the murders charged in the Indictment had not been established. 

1769.       The Prosecution requests that the Appeals Chamber enter a conviction against Lazarević for aiding and abetting murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war under Article 3 of the Statute and murder and persecution as crimes against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute in relation  to  the  killings  of  287  Kosovo  Albanians  at  Korenica/Korenicë  and  Meja/Mejë  on
27 April 1999 and of two Kosovo Albanians in Dubrava/Lisnaja around 25 May 1999. It further seeks that his sentence be increased significantly. 
2.   Whether the Trial Chamber applied the correct legal standard for the mens rea of aiding and abetting
(a)   Submissions of the parties

1770.       The  Prosecution  contends  that  the  Trial  Chamber  erroneously  required  evidence  that Lazarević was aware that the principal perpetrators “were going into the specific crimes sites  …  in order to commit killings”, thus requiring awareness of the “precise” crimes. It argues that the
Trial Chamber need only have been satisfied that Lazarević was aware “that one of a number of
crimes will probably be committed” or in other words, that he was aware of the “likelihood” that murders would be committed. The Prosecution argues that the Trial Chamber’s finding that Lazarević knew of incidents of VJ members murdering Kosovo Albanians was sufficient to satisfy
the mens rea requirement of aiding and abetting murder. 

1771.      Lazarević responds that, in its evaluation of his mens rea for aiding and abetting murder, the
Trial Chamber applied a legal standard consistent with the Tribunal’s jurisprudence. 
(b)   Analysis

1772.      It is firmly established in the jurisprudence of the Tribunal that to satisfy the mens rea requirement for aiding and abetting, it must be shown that the aider and abettor knew that his acts or omissions assisted the commission of the specific crime by the principal, and that the aider and abettor was aware of the essential elements of the crime which was ultimately committed, including
the intent of the principal perpetrator. In addition, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it is not

necessary that the aider and abettor know the precise crime that was intended and was in fact committed – if he is aware that one of a number of crimes will probably be committed, and one of those crimes is committed, he has intended to facilitate the commission of that crime, and is guilty as an aider and abettor. 

1773.       The Appeals Chamber has previously defined “specific crime” as referring to, for example, “murder, extermination, rape, torture, wanton destruction of civilian property, etc.” There is no legal requirement that the aider and abettor know every detail of the crime that was eventually committed. Nonetheless, the degree of knowledge pertaining to the details of the crime required to satisfy the mens rea of aiding and abetting will depend on the circumstances of the case, including the scale of the crimes and the type of assistance provided.

1774.       In the present case, the Trial Chamber correctly set out the applicable mens rea standard for aiding and abetting. It further found that it had not been proven that Lazarević knew that “VJ and MUP forces were going into the specific crime sites  …  in order to commit killings”. The Appeals Chamber does not consider the reference to “specific crime sites” to express a requirement that Lazarević knew of the “precise” crime in terms of the exact location where murder was to be committed or the number of people to be killed. Nor is there any indication that the Trial Chamber required knowledge of a certainty, as opposed to a probability, that murder would be committed. Rather, the Appeals Chamber understands the Trial Chamber’s finding, particularly in reference to its use of “in order to commit killings”, to mean that it was not satisfied that Lazarević was
aware of the mens rea of the perpetrators, that is aware that members of the VJ and MUP forces were going into towns or villages (i.e. what later became specific crimes sites) during the course of their operations with the intent to kill Kosovo Albanians. Accordingly, the Trial Chamber applied a standard whereby it required that Lazarević be aware of the essential elements of the specific crime committed,  including  the  mental  state  of  the  perpetrators.  The  Appeals  Chamber  is  therefore satisfied that the Trial Chamber applied the correct legal standard in assessing whether Lazarević had the mens rea for aiding and abetting murder.

1775.      In light of the above, the Appeals Chamber dismisses the Prosecution’s submission that the Trial Chamber erred in law in relation to the mens rea standard of aiding and abetting.
3.   Whether the Trial Chamber erred in fact in finding that the mental element of aiding and abetting murder had not been established with respect to Lazarević
(a)   Submissions of the parties

1776.      The Prosecution argues that no reasonable trial chamber could have concluded that the mental  element  of  aiding  and  abetting  the  murders  at  Korenica/Korenicë and  Meja/Mejë  on
27 April 1999 and in Dubrava/Lisnaja around 25 May 1999 had not been established in relation to Lazarević. The Prosecution submits that at the end of 1998, Lazarević was aware that VJ and MUP violence in Kosovo had resulted in numerous murders. The Prosecution seeks to rely on the Trial Chamber’s findings that Lazarević was closely following the events on the ground in Kosovo in 1998 and regularly received Priština Corps security department reports, knew that the Priština Corps might commit crimes, and learned about allegations of murder of civilians. The Prosecution thus argues that Lazarević was “aware that murders of civilians were likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999.” 

1777.       The Prosecution further points to the Trial Chamber’s findings that during the Indictment period Lazarević continued to receive information about crimes, including the commission of murder. It refers to the Trial Chamber’s findings that Lazarević frequently visited the units in the
field, knew of the climate of terror created by the VJ and the MUP in Priština/Prishtina, learned about specific allegations of murder, and was aware of the campaign of terror, violence and forcible displacement against the Kosovo Albanian civilian population. 

1778.      The Prosecution also submits that Lazarević knew that killings would be committed with discriminatory intent since he was aware of the discriminatory nature of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement against Kosovo Albanians in the course of which these killings were carried out. Finally, it argues that since Lazarević was aware that “it was likely that murders would occur” during the unlawful displacement of the Kosovo Albanian population, he was aware that his acts and omissions would assist not only the commission of deportation and forcible transfer, but also murder. 

1779.      Lazarević responds that no evidence supports the allegations that he was aware of the probability that murder with discriminatory intent would be committed as a result of the forcible displacement  of  the  Kosovo  Albanian  population  and  that  his  acts  would  assist  in  its commission. He points to orders of the Priština Corps Command for the prevention of crimes and protection of the civilian population as well as to evidence of measures taken to investigate crimes and punish the perpetrators. 

1780.       The Prosecution replies that Lazarević erroneously suggests that measures by military and police authorities to punish VJ reservists for crimes negate his knowledge of the likelihood of their
occurrence. It also contends that Lazarević’s responsibility does not depend on whether or not the VJ was responsible for the killings, as he suggests, but rather on his knowledge of the MUP’s involvement in killings during joint VJ and MUP actions. 
(b)   Analysis

1781.       In finding that the mental element of aiding and abetting murder had not been established in relation to Lazarević, the Trial Chamber held that:

While the forcible displacements were part of the VJ and MUP organised campaign, the Chamber is not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that killings  …  were intended aims of this campaign. Accordingly, although he was aware of VJ members killing Kosovo Albanians in some instances, it has not been proved that Lazarević was aware that VJ and MUP forces were going into the specific crime sites referred to above in order to commit killings  … . 

1782.      Thus, the Trial Chamber was not satisfied that Lazarević was aware that in the course of their operations the VJ and MUP forces would act with the intent to kill Kosovo Albanians. 

1783.       The Appeals Chamber notes that the Prosecution does not challenge any underlying factual findings relevant to Lazarević’s mens rea, namely the various findings on his knowledge of the commission of crimes by the VJ and the MUP prior to and during spring 1999 when the charged crimes were found to have been committed. Rather, the Prosecution avers that the Trial Chamber made all the factual findings necessary to convict Lazarević and that the only reasonable conclusion based  on  those  findings  is  that  he  possessed  the  requisite  mens rea  of  aiding  and  abetting
murder. 

1784.       The Appeals Chamber observes that when addressing the issue of Lazarević’s mens rea, the Trial Chamber specifically referred to its finding that killings were not intended aims of the VJ and the MUP organised campaign. In addition, the Trial Chamber found that there was no evidence of a clear pattern of murder. In the circumstances of this case, the absence of killings on a widespread,  organised,  and  consistent  basis  during  VJ  and  MUP  operations  as  to  evince  a discernible pattern, is a relevant factor in relation to Lazarević’s mens rea.

1785.      The  Appeals  Chamber  turns  to  examine  the  Prosecution’s  argument  that  the  Trial Chamber’s factual findings in relation to Lazarević’s knowledge of some instances of killings, could lead a  reasonable trier of fact to  conclude that the only reasonable inference was that
Lazarević had the mens rea for aiding and abetting the murders committed at Korenica/Korenicë and  Meja/Mejë  on  27 April 1999,  and  of  two  Kosovo  Albanians  in  Dubrava/Lisnaja  around 25 May 1999. The Appeals Chamber will first assess whether no reasonable trier of fact could have found that Lazarević did not have the mens rea for aiding and abetting the murders committed in Korenica/Korenicë  and  Meja/Mejë  on  27 April 1999,  by  addressing  the  relevant  evidence  and factual findings cited by the Prosecution related to his knowledge up to the time of these murders. Subsequently, the Appeals Chamber will consider whether no reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that Lazarević did not have the mens rea for aiding and abetting the murders committed in Dubrava/Lisnaja around 25 May 1999, in light of the totality of the evidence on his knowledge by this date.

1786.      In support of its argument that Lazarević knew that “murders of civilians were likely to occur if he ordered the VJ to operate in Kosovo in 1999”, the Prosecution refers to the Trial Chamber’s findings in relation to Lazarević’s knowledge of incidents of murder committed in 1998, namely that he was aware of UN Security Council Resolution 1199, expressing grave concern over the “excessive and indiscriminate use of force” by the VJ and the MUP, resulting, inter alia, in “numerous civilian casualties” and that he knew of the alleged involvement of the VJ in the
murders  of  civilians  in  Gornje  Obrinje/Abria  e  Epërme  in  late  1998. In  relation  to Resolution 1199, the Appeals Chamber considers that it furnished Lazarević with relatively general information about civilian casualties in 1998. As to the killings of a number of civilians in Gornje Obrinje/Abria e Epërme in late 1998, the Trial Chamber found that although Lazarević knew of the alleged involvement of the MUP and the VJ in the killings, he did not know of VJ responsibility for these killings. 

1787.       In  view  of  the  general  nature  of  the  information  contained  in  Resolution  1199  and Lazarević’s knowledge of the alleged responsibility of the MUP forces for one isolated incident of murder in 1998, the Appeals Chamber considers that a reasonable trier of fact could have found that by the end of 1998, Lazarević was not aware of the probability that members of the VJ forces possessed the intent to kill Kosovo Albanian civilians during their operations and would continue to act with such an intent during their future operations in Kosovo in 1999.

1788.       The  Prosecution  further  seeks  to  rely  on  the  Trial  Chamber’s  findings  that,  in  1998, Lazarević: (i) regularly received Priština Corps security department reports; (ii) closely followed the events on the ground in Kosovo; (iii) knew that the Priština Corps might commit crimes in reaction to KLA provocations; and (iv) knew that joint VJ and MUP action could result in “uncontrolled fire at  …  individuals not involved in combat operations.” The Appeals Chamber observes, however, that nothing in these findings suggests that Lazarević received information specifically about the commission of murder.

1789.       In relation to Lazarević’s knowledge of murders committed in spring 1999, the Prosecution submits that Lazarević: (i) was aware of the content of Drewienkiewicz’s press statement which alleged widespread crimes committed by the VJ and the MUP as of 2 April 1999; (ii) learned, by late March 1999, of the operation in Žegra/Zhegra where VJ, MUP, and irregular forces drove Kosovo Albanians away “by use of   inter alia   killings”; (iii) received, by early April 1999, eight criminal reports for murder; (iv) learned, at the beginning of April 1999, of allegations about a  massacre and  a  mass  grave at  Izbica; (v) knew, by  26 April 1999, of  the  alleged involvement of the Priština Corps’ 252nd Armoured Brigade in the execution of 20 civilians in Mali
Alaš/Hallac i Vogel on 19 April 1999; and (vi) showed, in his report of 24 May 1999, his
awareness of murders committed by the MUP at mixed MUP and VJ police checkpoints. 

1790.      In relation to Drewienkiewicz’s press statement, the Appeals Chamber has already found that the Trial Chamber erred in concluding that Lazarević was aware of its content. As to the operation in Žegra/Zhegra, the Trial Chamber considered that Lazarević knew that VJ members committed crimes there at the end of March 1999. In particular, the evidence relied upon by the Trial Chamber in this regard shows that Lazarević informed the 3rd Army Command that eight criminal reports were submitted against perpetrators of murder. The Trial Chamber also considered that in relation to the Izbica massacre, the evidence showed that Lazarević learned of the
reports and satellite images of mass graves in Izbica by early April 1999, and knew that the 37th Motorised Brigade, which was re-subordinated to the Priština Corps at that time, had conducted operations against the KLA within two kilometres of Izbica. 

1791.       In relation to the incident at Mali Alaš/Hallac i Vogel on 19 April 1999, the Trial Chamber found that Lazarević was aware of the possible involvement of the 252nd Armoured Brigade in the execution of 20 civilians. It also found that Lazarević was informed of the proceedings initiated by the wartime military court attached to the Priština Corps in order to determine the identities of the perpetrators. The Trial Chamber also considered a report sent by Lazarević to the 3rd Army Command on 24 May 1999 indicating that he was aware of problems at checkpoints. The report
stated that “the MUP tolerate d  criminal activities of its members against the  Albanian  civilian population”, including murder. 

1792.       The Appeals Chamber considers that a reasonable trier of fact could have found that by the end of April 1999 Lazarević did not know of the probability that the VJ and MUP forces would act with the intent to murder Kosovo Albanian civilians during their operation in Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë on 27 April 1999, as opposed to simply the possibility that isolated incidents of murder might occur.

1793.     The Appeals Chamber also finds that the Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that Lazarević’s 24 May 1999 report indicating his knowledge of instances of murder committed by MUP members at checkpoints, even when viewed in combination with the other evidence before the Trial Chamber, would lead a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the only reasonable inference is that by 25 May 1999, Lazarević knew that the MUP and VJ forces would act with the intent to murder Kosovo Albanian civilians during their operation in Dubrava/Lisnaja. The Appeals Chamber recalls in this respect the Trial Chamber’s findings that VJ and MUP joint operations
spread over 13 municipalities in Kosovo and that during the course of the NATO campaign the
forces of the Priština Corps consisted of approximately 35,000 members. Contrasted with the number of incidents of murder involving the VJ and the MUP of which Lazarević was aware, these figures reinforce the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević did not have the mens rea of aiding and abetting murder. The Prosecution has failed to demonstrate an error on the part of the Trial Chamber in this regard.

1794.      Furthermore, the Prosecution suggests that Lazarević’s awareness of the excessive use of force in 1998 and the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement carried out by joint VJ and MUP forces against Kosovo Albanians in 1999, when viewed with the evidence of Lazarević’s  knowledge  of  some  incidents  of  killings,  confirms  the  conclusion  that  he  knew “murders were likely” during joint VJ and MUP operations in Kosovo in 1999. This assertion in itself is unconvincing. The Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that the only reasonable inference
from such combined knowledge on Lazarević’s part, is that he was aware of the probability that murder would be committed during this campaign and that his conduct assisted in its commission. In particular, the Prosecution has failed to show that Lazarević’s awareness of the forcible displacement of Kosovo Albanian civilians, the climate of terror created by the VJ and the MUP in Priština/Prishtina, and the instances of criminal activity generally lead to the only reasonable
conclusion that he also knew of an intent of the VJ and MUP forces to commit murder. Additionally, the Appeals Chamber recalls that the Trial Chamber was neither satisfied that murder was a goal of the campaign nor that the killings evinced a clear pattern. Therefore, a reasonable trier of fact could have concluded that while Lazarević knew of some instances of killings that occurred during the course of the campaign of terror, violence, and forcible displacement, the evidence did not establish his knowledge of the commission of murder to an extent that would lead to the only reasonable conclusion that Lazarević knew that the VJ forces would act with the intent
to commit murder during their operations in Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë on 27 April 1999 and in Dubrava/Lisnaja around 25 May 1999.

1795.      In view of the above considerations, the Appeals Chamber finds that the Prosecution has failed to show an error in the Trial Chamber’s conclusion that Lazarević did not have the requisite mens  rea   for  aiding  and  abetting  the  murders  in  Korenica/Korenicë  and  Meja/Mejë  on
27 April 1999, and in Dubrava/Lisnaja around 25 May 1999. In light of the foregoing, the Appeals
Chamber  dismisses  the  Prosecution’s  second  ground  of  appeal  with  respect  to  Lazarević  and upholds his acquittal for aiding and abetting murder.
IX. 	SENTENCING
A.   Introduction

1796.       The Trial Chamber found Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić guilty, through participation in a JCE, of deportation, other inhumane acts (forcible transfer), murder, and persecution as crimes against humanity and of murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war, and sentenced each of them to 22 years of imprisonment. Lazarević was convicted of aiding and abetting deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity, and was sentenced to
15 years of imprisonment. The Appellants and the Prosecution have all appealed against the
sentences imposed. 

1797.      Pursuant to Article 24 of the Statute and Rule 101 of the Rules, a trial chamber must take the following factors into account in sentencing: the gravity of the offence or totality of the culpable conduct; the individual circumstances of the convicted person; the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia; and aggravating and mitigating circumstances. 

1798.       Appeals against sentence, as appeals from a trial judgement, are appeals stricto sensu; they are of a corrective nature and are not trials de novo. Trial chambers are vested with broad discretion in determining an appropriate sentence. As a general rule, the Appeals Chamber will not revise a sentence unless the trial chamber has committed a discernible error in exercising its discretion or has failed to follow the applicable law. It is for the party challenging the sentence to demonstrate how the trial chamber ventured outside its discretionary framework in imposing the sentence. 

1799.       To show that the trial chamber committed a discernible error in exercising its discretion, an appellant must demonstrate that the trial chamber gave weight to extraneous or irrelevant considerations, failed to accord weight or sufficient weight to relevant considerations, made a clear
error as to the facts upon which it exercised its discretion, or demonstrate that its decision was so unreasonable or plainly unjust that the Appeals Chamber is able to infer that the trial chamber must have failed to exercise its discretion properly.
B.   Šainović’s appeal

[Omitted]
C.    Pavković’s appeal

[Omitted]
D.   Lazarević’s appeal
1.   Alleged errors in the assessment of gravity

1817.      Lazarević submits that the Trial Chamber erred in evaluating the gravity of his crimes. He contends that his 15-year sentence is inappropriately severe in view of his role, position, and contribution to the underlying crimes and “reserves the right” to elaborate on his position during oral arguments. The Prosecution responds that this sub-ground should be summarily dismissed for lack of development and argues that Lazarević has failed to explain how the Trial Chamber erred in assessing the gravity of his crimes. Lazarević replies that his Appeal Brief sufficiently explains his position and his oral arguments will only elaborate his submissions. 

1818.      The Appeals Chamber recalls that it may summarily dismiss “mere assertions unsupported by any evidence” or “undeveloped assertions”. Appellants’ briefs must include relevant factual and legal arguments in support of each ground of appeal as well as the precise relief sought. To reserve  submissions  for  oral  argument  denies  the  opposing  party  an  adequate  opportunity  to respond, and is therefore “not proper procedure”. Lazarević has clearly failed to substantiate his arguments in this regard. The Appeals Chamber therefore dismisses this sub-ground of his appeal.
2.   Alleged errors in assessing mitigating factors

1819.      Lazarević argues that the Trial Chamber failed to properly assess or attach adequate weight to his voluntary surrender, his interview with the Prosecution, his testimony as the first witness in his own defence, his health and family circumstances, and his good character. He contends that had the Trial Chamber correctly evaluated all of these mitigating factors, it would have imposed a more lenient sentence. Finally, Lazarević “reserves the right” to elaborate on the existence of
“new”, unspecified, mitigating circumstances during oral arguments.

1820.       The Prosecution responds that Lazarević’s arguments in this regard should be dismissed because the Trial Chamber properly evaluated each of the mitigating circumstances raised and Lazarević fails to demonstrate any error warranting the intervention of the Appeals Chamber. As to  the  existence  of  “new  mitigating  circumstances”,  the  Prosecution  contends  that  the  proper method to raise subsequent developments that mitigate a sentence is to file a motion under Rule 115 of the Rules.

1821.      The Appeals Chamber observes that the Trial Chamber discussed the factors raised by Lazarević at length. The Trial Chamber treated his surrender, his health and family circumstances, and his interview with the Prosecution as mitigating circumstances. However, it gave limited weight to Lazarević’s purported good character and considered that his decision to take the stand in his own defence did not have a mitigating effect. Lazarević merely contests the Trial Chamber’s evaluation of these factors and has failed to show any discernible error in this respect. Moreover, he has failed to substantiate the existence of “new” mitigating circumstances to which he alludes in his Appeal Brief. In these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber dismisses this
sub-ground of his appeal.
E.    Lukić’s appeal

[Omitted]
F.    Prosecution’s appeal

1831.       The Prosecution contends that the sentences imposed are manifestly inadequate and points out that, in the context of a four-volume judgement, the section on gravity is only six paragraphs long. The Prosecution further argues that when assessing the gravity, the Trial Chamber failed to consider the seriousness of the underlying crimes as well as the Appellants’ role and degree of participation in them. In addition, the Prosecution maintains that the Trial Chamber failed to consider a number of mandatory factors when assessing the seriousness of the underlying crimes, including the discriminatory nature of the crimes, the vulnerability of the victims, and the effect of
the crimes on victims and their relatives. 

1832.      Šainović and Lukić respond that the Prosecution’s request for higher sentences should be dismissed, as their 22-year prison sentences are within the range that the Prosecution requested at trial. Šainović  and Lukić also submit that the Prosecution based part of its arguments in this
respect on crimes for which they were not convicted. In addition, they argue that, contrary to the
Prosecution’s arguments, the Trial Chamber did consider the discriminatory nature of the crimes and the vulnerability of and impact on the victims. Šainović and Lukić further submit that the Trial  Chamber  considered  their  roles  and  the  degree  of  their  participation  in  the  crimes,  but accorded too much weight to them or double-counted them. 

1833.      In reply, the Prosecution submits that, at trial, it simply indicated a sentencing range of

20 years to life for the Trial Chamber’s consideration, having regard to the specific modes of liability and crimes for which the Appellants could be found criminal responsible. 

1834.     The Appeals Chamber recalls that trial chambers are vested with broad discretion in determining an appropriate sentence and that it is incumbent on parties to present all information relevant to sentencing at trial. The Appeals Chamber will only intervene where a trial chamber has abused its discretion. The Appeals Chamber notes that in its Closing Brief and closing arguments, the Prosecution requested “sentences raging from 20 years to life imprisonment” with regard to all the Appellants, irrespective of the modes of liability charged. The Prosecution cannot seek to have a more severe sentence imposed on appeal where, as here, the Trial Chamber, by exercising its discretion, imposed a sentence within the Prosecution’s requested range. Thus, the Appeals Chamber dismisses the Prosecution’s arguments concerning Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić who were sentenced to 22 years of imprisonment. However, as Lazarević was sentenced to
15 years of imprisonment, below the 20-year minimum sought by the Prosecution, the Appeals
Chamber will examine whether the Trial Chamber erred in its assessment of the gravity of his crimes. 

1835.       In this regard, the Trial Chamber noted that Lazarević was guilty of aiding and abetting the forcible displacement of hundreds of thousands of Kosovo Albanians. It further noted that some victims “were of a particularly vulnerable nature, such as young women, elderly people, and children”. Thus, in its assessment of gravity, the Trial Chamber was clearly aware of Lazarević’s role as an aider and abettor of the crimes in question, the victims’ circumstances, and that the underlying crimes specifically targeted Kosovo Albanians in a discriminatory manner. Despite the brevity of its reasoning, the Appeals Chamber is not satisfied that the Trial Chamber committed a discernible error warranting intervention. The Appeals Chamber accordingly dismisses the Prosecution’s submissions in this regard.
G.    Common appeal on the failure to individualise sentences

1836.      The Prosecution avers that “[t]he imposition of identical sentences for each JCE member and each aider and abettor fails to ‘individualise the penalties to fit the circumstances of the accused and the gravity of the crime.’” Specifically, the Prosecution asserts that, in assessing the gravity of the crimes, the Trial Chamber failed to adequately consider the role of each individual and the degree of their participation in the crimes. Šainović submits that the Trial Chamber failed to individualise the sentences, but argues that this failure should reduce rather than lengthen his
sentence. Lukić argues that the Trial Chamber failed to individualise the sentences and thereby
failed to give adequate weight to mitigating factors which it found have been established. 

1837.      At the outset, the Appeals Chamber notes that the Prosecution’s appeal focuses on the failure to individualise sentences based on the gravity component. The Appeals Chamber recalls that  trial  chambers  have  an  “overriding  obligation  to  tailor  a  penalty  to  fit  the  individual
circumstances of the accused and the gravity of the crime, with due regard to the entirety of the case”. Thus, gravity is not considered in isolation, but in conjunction with aggravating, mitigating, and other factors in determining the sentence.

1838.       The  Appeals  Chamber  notes  that,  in  determining  the  term  of  imprisonment,  the  Trial Chamber did not consider it appropriate to distinguish between Ojdanić and Lazarević, who were sentenced to 15 years of imprisonment for aiding and abetting crimes, or to discriminate among Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić, who were each sentenced to 22 years of imprisonment for their participation in the JCE. However, although the Trial Chamber acknowledged that the crimes
attributed  to  each  individual  were  not  entirely  identical, it  failed  to  indicate  whether  it

considered these differences in sentencing. For example, Pavković alone was convicted of persecution through sexual assaults in Ćirez/Qirez and Beleg, yet no distinction was drawn between his sentence and that imposed on Šainović and Lukić.

1839.      Moreover,  it  is  not  apparent  whether  the  Trial  Chamber  individually  evaluated  the mitigating and aggravating factors as well as the different role and participation of each of the Appellants in determining their respective sentences. For example, the Trial Chamber assessed the mitigating and aggravating factors in relation to each and identified differences in the conduct and roles of Šainović,  Pavković, and Lukić in executing the common purpose of the JCE. Nonetheless, it imposed identical sentences on the three, simply because they were convicted on the basis of the same mode of liability. The Appeals Chamber considers that, in light of the Trial Chamber’s obligation to individualise penalties in accordance with the circumstances of the accused and the gravity of the crime, the Trial Chamber erred in declining to individualise the sentences it imposed.

1840.       In these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber grants, in part, the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal and grants Šainović’s sub-ground 7(3), and Lukić’s sub-ground KK(1) in relevant part. The Appeals Chamber will consider the impact of these findings, if any, below.
H.    Conclusion

1841.        The Appeals Chamber finds that, with the exception of the arguments of the Prosecution, Šainović, and Lukić pertaining to the Trial Chamber’s failure to individualise the sentences and Lukić’s arguments regarding the assessment of his surrender as a mitigating circumstance, the parties have failed to demonstrate that the Trial Chamber erred in determining the sentences imposed. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber grants the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal, in part, sub-ground 7(3) of Šainović’s appeal, and sub-grounds KK(1), in part, and KK(3) of Lukić’s appeal. The Appeals Chamber will consider the impact of these findings, if any, below. The Appeals  Chamber  dismisses  all  other  grounds  of  appeal  raised  by  the  Appellants  and  the Prosecution with respect to sentencing.
I.    Impact of the Appeals Chamber’s Findings on Sentences

1842.      The Appeals Chamber recalls its finding that the Trial Chamber erred in failing to individualise the sentences of the Appellants. Accordingly, the Appeals Chamber has duly considered the gravity of the crimes imputed to each of the Appellants. Moreover, it has carefully taken into account the conduct and contribution of Šainović, Pavković, and Lukić to the JCE, and Lazarević’s acts of assistance to the forcible displacement, as well as the Appeals Chamber’s reversal of some of its findings in this respect. 

1843.       With respect to Šainović, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it has reversed his convictions for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity committed prior to 7 May 1999, i.e. at Đakovica/Gjakova town, Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë, Bela Crkva/Bellacërka, Mala Kruša/Krusha e Vogël, Suva Reka/Suhareka town, Izbica/Izbicë, and near Gornja Sudimlja/Studimja e Epërme. The Appeals Chamber also recalls that it has reversed his convictions for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila and Turićevac/Turiçec. The Appeals Chamber considers that these reversals represent a reduction in Šainović’s culpability and call for a revision of his sentence. Šainović, however, remains convicted of very serious crimes. In these  circumstances,  the   Appeals  Chamber   reduces  Šainović’s  sentence  of   22   years   of
imprisonment to 18 years of imprisonment.

1844.       With respect to Pavković, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it has reversed his convictions for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity with respect to 274 of the 287 Kosovo Albanians killed in and around Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë during the Reka/Caragoj valley operation. The Appeals Chamber also recalls that it has reversed his convictions for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila and Turićevac/Turiçec. Pavković, however, remains convicted of very serious crimes. In these circumstances, considering the limited nature of these reversals, the Appeals Chamber finds that no reduction  of  sentence  is  warranted.  Consequently,  the  Appeals  Chamber  affirms  Pavković’s sentence of 22 years of imprisonment.

1845.        With respect to Lukić, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it has reversed his convictions for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity committed prior to or on 1 April 1999, i.e. at Bela Crkva/Bellacërka, Mala Kruša/Krusha e Vogël, Suva Reka/Suhareka town, Izbica/Izbicë, and Đakovica/Gjakova town. The Appeals Chamber further recalls that it has reversed his convictions for murder with respect to 274 of the 287 Kosovo Albanians killed in and around Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë during the Reka/Caragoj valley operation. The Appeals Chamber also recalls that it has reversed his convictions for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila and Turićevac/Turiçec. The Appeals Chamber considers that these reversals represent a reduction in Lukić’s culpability and call for a revision of his sentence. Additionally, in this context, the Appeals Chamber notes that it has found that his surrender should have been considered as a mitigating factor. Lukić, however, remains convicted of very serious crimes. In these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber reduces Lukić’s sentence of 22 years of imprisonment to 20 years of imprisonment.

1846.        With respect to Lazarević, the Appeals Chamber recalls that it has reversed his convictions for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila, Kačanik/Kaçanik town, and Turićevac/Turiçec. The Appeals Chamber also recalls that, while the Trial Chamber held Lazarević responsible as an aider and abettor in relation to three forms of assistance to the commission of deportation and forcible transfer, the Appeals Chamber has found that only one form of assistance supports his conviction for aiding and abetting the commission of these crimes. The Appeals Chamber considers, however, that these findings have only a limited impact on Lazarević’s overall culpability as he remains convicted of serious crimes. In these circumstances, the Appeals Chamber reduces Lazarević’s sentence of 15 years of
imprisonment to 14 years of imprisonment.
X.	DISPOSITION

1847.       For the foregoing reasons, THE APPEALS CHAMBER,

PURSUANT TO Article 25 of the Statute and Rules 117 and 118 of the Rules;

NOTING the respective written submissions of the parties and the arguments they presented at the appeal hearing on 11-15 March 2013;

SITTING  in open session;

WITH RESPECT TO NIKOLA ŠAINOVIĆ,

GRANTS  in  part  Šainović’s  fourth  ground  of  appeal  and  REVERSES  his  convictions  for committing through his participation in a JCE murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity at Bela Crkva/Bellacërka, Mala Kruša/Krusha e Vogël, Suva Reka/Suhareka town, Izbica/Izbicë, Đakovica/Gjakova town, Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë, and near Gornja Sudimlja/Studimja e Epërme (Count 3 in part, Count 4 in part, and Count 5 in part);

GRANTS sub-ground 7(3) of Šainović’s appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES, Judge Liu and Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, Šainović’s appeal in all other respects;

REVERSES proprio motu Šainović’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part);

REVERSES Šainović’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Turićevac/Turiçec (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part), as a result of granting sub-ground 1(f) of Lazarević’s appeal in part;

AFFIRMS, Judge Liu and Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, the remainder of Šainović’s convictions under Counts 1 to 5;

ALLOWS in part, Judge Liu and Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, the Prosecution’s third and fourth grounds of appeal and FINDS, Judge Liu and Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, that the Trial Chamber incorrectly found Šainović not guilty for committing through his participation in a JCE persecution, through sexual assaults, as a crime against humanity in Beleg, Ćirez/Qirez, and

Priština/Prishtina (Count 5 in part), but DECLINES, Judge Ramaroson dissenting, to enter new convictions against him in this regard;

GRANTS in part the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES the Prosecution’s appeal concerning Šainović in all other respects;

SETS ASIDE the sentence of 22 years of imprisonment and IMPOSES a sentence of 18 years of imprisonment, subject to credit being given under Rule 101(C) of the Rules for the period he has already spent in detention;

WITH RESPECT TO NEBOJŠA PAVKOVIĆ,

DISMISSES Pavković’s appeal in its entirety;

REVERSES proprio motu Pavković’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part);

REVERSES Pavković’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Turićevac/Turiçec (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part), as a result of granting sub-ground 1(f) of Lazarević’s appeal in part;

REVERSES  Pavković’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity with respect to 274 of the 287 Kosovo Albanians killed in and around Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë during the Reka/Caragoj valley operation (Count 3 in part, Count 4 in part, and Count 5 in part), as a result of granting ground Q of Lukić’s appeal in part;

AFFIRMS  the remainder of Pavković’s convictions under Counts 1 to 5;

ALLOWS  in part the Prosecution’s fourth ground of appeal and FINDS that the Trial Chamber incorrectly found Pavković not guilty for committing through his participation in a JCE persecution, through sexual assaults, as a crime against humanity in Priština/Prishtina (Count 5 in part), but DECLINES, Judge Ramaroson dissenting, to enter new convictions against him in this regard;

GRANTS in part the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES the Prosecution’s appeal concerning Pavković in all other respects;

AFFIRMS   the  sentence  of  22  years  of  imprisonment,  subject  to  credit  being  given  under Rule 101(C) of the Rules for the period he has already spent in detention;

WITH RESPECT TO VLADIMIR LAZAREVIĆ,

GRANTS in part sub-grounds 1(f) and 1(i) of Lazarević’s appeal and REVERSES his convictions for aiding and abetting deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Turićevac/Turiçec and Kačanik/Kaçanik town (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part);

GRANTS in part sub-grounds 3(e), 3(h), and 3(i) of Lazarević’s appeal and SETS ASIDE the Trial Chamber’s findings that: (i) his failure to take adequate investigative and punitive measures substantially contributed to the commission of the crimes of forcible transfer and deportation by VJ forces; and (ii) his inspection of the VJ units provided encouragement and moral support to the VJ forces engaging in forcible displacement;

DISMISSES Lazarević’s appeal in all other respects;

REVERSES   proprio  motu  Lazarević’s  convictions  for  aiding  and  abetting  deportation  and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part);

AFFIRMS  the remainder of Lazarević’s convictions under Counts 1 and 2;

ALLOWS in part the Prosecution’s fifth ground of appeal and FINDS that the Trial Chamber incorrectly found Lazarević not guilty for aiding and abetting deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Žabare/Zhabar, Dušanovo/Dushanova, Sojevo/Sojeva, Staro Selo/Fshat i Vjetër, and Mirosavlje/Mirosala (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part), but DECLINES, Judge Ramaroson dissenting, to enter new convictions against him in this regard;

GRANTS in part the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES the Prosecution’s appeal concerning Lazarević in all other respects;

SETS ASIDE the sentence of 15 years of imprisonment and IMPOSES a sentence of 14 years of imprisonment, subject to credit being given under Rule 101(C) of the Rules for the period he has already spent in detention;

WITH RESPECT TO SRETEN LUKIĆ,

GRANTS in part sub-ground O(1)(e) and ground Q of Lukić’s appeal and REVERSES his convictions for committing through his participation in a JCE murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war and murder and persecution, through murder, as crimes against humanity at Bela Crkva/Bellacërka, Mala  Kruša/Krusha  e  Vogël,  Suva  Reka/Suhareka  town,  Izbica/Izbicë,  and Đakovica/Gjakova town as well as with respect to 274 of the 287 Kosovo Albanians killed in and around Korenica/Korenicë and Meja/Mejë during the Reka/Caragoj valley operation (Count 3 in part, Count 4 in part, and Count 5 in part);

GRANTS sub-grounds KK(3) and KK(1), in part, of Lukić’s appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES Lukić’s appeal in all other respects;

REVERSES proprio motu Lukić’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Tušilje/Tushila (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part);

REVERSES Lukić’s convictions as a participant in a JCE for deportation and inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity committed in Turićevac/Turiçec (Count 1 in part and Count 2 in part), as a result of granting sub-ground 1(f) of Lazarević’s appeal in part;

AFFIRMS  the remainder of Lukić’s convictions under Counts 1 to 5;

ALLOWS in part the Prosecution’s third and fourth grounds of appeal and FINDS that the Trial Chamber incorrectly found Lukić not guilty for committing through his participation in a JCE persecution, through sexual assaults, as a crime against humanity in Beleg, Ćirez/Qirez, and Priština/Prishtina (Count 5 in part), but DECLINES, Judge Ramaroson dissenting, to enter new convictions against him in this regard;

GRANTS in part the Prosecution’s sixth ground of appeal concerning sentencing;

DISMISSES the Prosecution’s appeal concerning Lukić in all other respects;

SETS ASIDE the sentence of 22 years of imprisonment and IMPOSES a sentence of 20 years of imprisonment, subject to credit being given under Rule 101(C) of the Rules for the period he has already spent in detention;

RULES  that this Judgement shall be enforced immediately pursuant to Rule 118 of the Rules;

ORDERS that, in accordance with Rules 103(C) and 107 of the Rules, that the Appellants are to remain in the custody of the Tribunal pending the finalisation of arrangements for their transfer to the State where their sentences will be served.

Done in English and French, the English text being authoritative.





Judge Liu Daqun appends a partially dissenting opinion and a declaration.

Judge Arlette Ramaroson appends a dissenting opinion.

Judge Bakhtiyar Tuzmukhamedov appends a dissenting opinion.

Dated this twenty-third day of January 2014,

At The Hague,

The Netherlands.
XI. 	PARTIALLY DISSENTING  OPINION AND DECLARATION OF JUDGE LIU

[Omitted; does not concern “specific direction” or defendant Lazarevic]
XII. 	OPINION  DISSIDENTE  DU JUGE RAMAROSON



[Dissenting opinion of Judge Ramarason, in French]

[Omitted; does not concern “specific direction” or defendant Lazarevic]
XIII. 	DISSENTING  OPINION  OF JUDGE TUZMUKHAMEDOV
A. Introduction

1.    In this Appeal Judgement, the Appeals Chamber, by majority, affirms Šainović’s convictions pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute for committing, based on JCE I, the crimes of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity. The Majority further upholds Šainović’s convictions pursuant to JCE III for murder and persecutions through murder as crimes against humanity as well as murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war in relation to a single incident at Dubrava/Lisnaja, and persecutions through destruction of or damage to religious property as crimes against humanity. In addition, the Majority finds Šainović responsible under JCE III for persecutions through sexual assaults as crimes against humanity. 

2.    For the reasons set out below, I respectfully disagree with the Majority that the Trial Chamber reasonably found that Šainović made a significant contribution to the common purpose and thus participated in the JCE.

3.    With  respect  to  Lazarević,  the  Appeals  Chamber  affirms  his  convictions  pursuant  to Article 7(1) of the Statute for aiding and abetting the crimes of deportation and other inhumane acts (forcible transfer) as crimes against humanity. I explain further below my disagreement with the Majority’s discussion of the issue of specific direction as an element of aiding and abetting.
B. Šainović’s contribution to the JCE

[Omitted]
C. Specific Direction

40.    In the context of Lazarević’s appeal against his convictions for aiding and abetting, the Majority discusses in great detail the issue of specific direction. I have no intention to comment on whether or not specific direction is an element of aiding and abetting. Rather, for the reasons set out below, I am not convinced that this Appeal Judgement is the appropriate forum to address the issue, especially because it has no pertinence to Lazarević’s case. Accordingly, I also refrain from joining any finding of the Majority which in my understanding may constitute a new statement in substance on the issue of specific direction.

41.    In  paving  the  ground  for  its  assessment,  the  Majority  considers  that  the  interpretation favored by Lazarević on the basis of the Tadić Appeal Judgment and others that specific direction is an element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting and must be established beyond reasonable doubt91 “would appear to be at odds  …  with a plain reading” of the Mrkšić and Šlivančanin Appeal Judgement and the ruling in the Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgement. 

42.    The Majority then proceeds by stating that, where faced with conflicting previous decisions, the Appeals Chamber is obliged to determine which decision to follow or whether to depart from both decisions for cogent reasons in the interests of justice. In an accompanying footnote, the Majority considers that the issue was raised by the parties but the Trial Chamber made no finding on this matter. Consequently, the Majority concludes that the discussion as to whether specific direction is required “cannot be circumvented in determining the outcome of the present case”. In addition, the Majority notes that even if requiring “specific direction” would not ultimately invalidate the Trial Judgement, the Appeals Chamber may hear appeals in which a party has raised a legal issue of general significance to the Tribunal’s jurisprudence, and concludes that the significance of the issue at hand warrants the intervention by the Appeals Chamber. 

43.    While these explanations purport to demonstrate that it is absolutely necessary to address the issue of specific direction in this Appeal Judgement, I remain unconvinced. Specifically, I observe in bewilderment the Majority’s reasoning that if it were to adopt the requirement of “specific direction,” it would have to examine whether Lazarević’s assistance was indeed specifically directed at the underlying crimes. However, the Majority explicitly considers specific direction at length anyway. At the very least, the Majority could have restricted its holding to cases such as the present one where the accused is physically present at the act of the crime, even if perhaps not at the very moment the crime is commited, while leaving for another day the question if “specific direction” may be required if the accused is remote from the site of the crime.  

44.    Moreover, even if it were unavoidable to discuss the issue of “specific direction” here, I cannot discern how the Majority arrives at the conclusion that this matter “cannot be circumvented in determining the outcome of the present case”. Any impact of the “specific direction” requirement on Lazarević’s case would require showing that his assistance was indeed not “specifically directed” at the commission of crimes. However, the Majority makes no finding in this regard. Accordingly, it is not clear to me whether the Majority’s rejection of specific direction as an element of aiding and abetting was dispositive of its decision to affirm Lazarević’s convictions for aiding and abetting or is made obiter dicta.

45.    While it is within the Appeals Chamber’s discretion to consider legal matters of general importance to the Tribunal’s case law, I think that this exceptional measure should not be resorted to here.

46.    For these reasons, I tend to think that the issue of specific direction would have better been left for discussion in cases where this matter is clearly relevant to the conviction of an accused and the parties have reason and opportunity to focus their full attention on it.

47.    In addition, I recall that in order to ensure the fair trial rights of an accused to have “like cases treated alike”, the Appeals Chamber should follow its previous decisions unless there are cogent reasons to depart from them in the interests of justice. Irrespective of whether there is a divergence between the Mrkšić and Šlivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements on the one hand and the Tadić  line of cases on the other, it is quite clear that the Majority in this Appeal Judgement departs from the latter. The Majority mentions the cogent reasons standard in passing, but provides no explanation as to whether it was guided by that standard in reaching its conclusions. 

48.    Finally, I note that in its assessment of other international jurisprudence and domestic law on aiding and abetting, the Majority resorts to a discussion of post-WWII cases, some of which do not necessarily concern this mode of liability, as well as general rules governing the mens rea. The Majority concludes on the basis of its analysis that specific direction “is not an element of aiding and abetting liability under customary international law”, while subsequently confirming the ruling in the Mrkšić and Šlivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements that specific direction is not an essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. In light of these findings, it is not clear to me whether the Majority considers its assessment and conclusions to be limited to the actus reus of aiding and abetting and thus indeed merely a reaffirmation of the statements in the Mrkšić and Šlivančanin and Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgements. Arguably, to conclude that specific direction is not an “essential ingredient of the actus reus of aiding and abetting” is not quite the same as saying that it is per se not an element of aiding and abetting.

49.    For these reasons, I dissent from this section in the Appeal Judgement.

Done in English and French, the English text being authoritative.





Dated this 23rd day of January 2014,At The Hague,The Netherlands.



[Seal of the Tribunal]
XIV. 	ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL HISTORY

[Omitted]
XV.	ANNEX B: CITED MATERIALS AND DEFINED TERMS
A.   Jurisprudence
1.   Tribunal

ALEKSOVSKIProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-A, Judgement, 24 March 2000 (“Aleksovski Appeal Judgement”)

BABIĆProsecutor v. Milan Babić, Case No. IT-03-72-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 18 July 2005 (“Babić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

BLAGOJEVIĆ AND JOKIĆProsecutor v. Vidoje Blagojević and Dragan Jokić, Case No. IT-02-60-A, Judgement, 9 May 2007 (“Blagojević and Jokić Appeal Judgement”)

BLAŠKIĆProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-T, Judgement, 3 March 2000 (“Blaškić Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-A, Judgement, 29 July 2004 (“Blaškić Appeal Judgement”)

BOŠKOSKI AND TARČULOVSKIProsecutor v. Ljube Boškoski and Johan Tarčulovski, Case No. IT-04-82-A, Judgement, 19 May 2010 (“Boškoski and Tarčulovski Appeal Judgement”)

BRALOProsecutor v. Miroslav Bralo, Case No. IT-95-17-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 2 April 2007 (“Bralo Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

BRðANINProsecutor v. Radoslav Brđanin, Case No. IT-99-36-T, Judgement, 1 September 2004 (“Brđanin Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Radoslav Brđanin, Case No. IT-99-36-A, Judgement, 3 April 2007 (“Brđanin Appeal Judgement”)

“ČELEBIĆI”Prosecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Landžo, Case No. IT-96-21-T, Judgement, 16 November 1998 (“Čelebići Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Landžo, Case No. IT-96-21-A, Judgement, 20 February 2001 (“Čelebići Appeal Judgement”)

DERONJIĆProsecutor v. Miroslav Deronjić, Case No. IT-02-61-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 20 July 2005 (“Deronjić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

FURUNDŽIJAProsecutor v. Anto Furundžija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-T, Judgement, 10 December 1998 (“Furundžija Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Anto Furundžija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-A, Judgement, 21 July 2000 (“Furundžija Appeal Judgement”)

GALIĆProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-A, Judgement, 30 November 2006 (“Galić Appeal Judgement”)

GOTOVINA AND MARKAČProsecutor v. Ante Gotovina and Mladen Markač, Case No. IT-06-90-A, Judgement, 16 November 2012 (“Gotovina and Markač Appeal Judgement”)

HADŽIHASANOVIĆ AND KUBURAProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-T, Judgement, 15 March 2006 (“Had`ihasanović and Kubura Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-A, Judgement, 22 April 2008 (“Had`ihasanović and Kubura Appeal Judgement”)

HALILOVIĆProsecutor v. Sefer Halilović, Case No. IT-01-48-A, Judgement, 16 October 2007 (“Halilović Appeal Judgement”)

HARADINAJ et al.Prosecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj, and Lahi Brahimaj, Case No. IT-04-84-A, Judgement, 19 July 2010 (“Haradinaj et al. Appeal Judgement”)

JELISIĆProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No. IT-95-10-A, Judgement, 5 July 2001 (“Jelisić Appeal Judgement”)

JOKIĆProsecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case No. IT-01-42/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 30 August 2005 (“Jokić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

KORDIĆ AND ČERKEZProsecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Ćerkez, Case No. IT-95-14/2-A, Judgement, 17 December 2004 (“Kordić and Ćerkez Appeal Judgement”)

KRAJIŠNIKProsecutor v. Momčilo Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-T, Judgement, 27 September 2006 (“Krajišnik Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Momčilo Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-A, Judgement, 17 March 2009 (“Krajišnik Appeal Judgement”)

KRNOJELACProsecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-T, Judgment, 15 March 2002 (“Krnojelac Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-A, Judgement, 17 September 2003 (“Krnojelac Appeal Judgement”)

KRSTIĆProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-T, Judgement, 2 August 2001 (“Krstić Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-A, Judgement, 19 April 2004 (“Krstić Appeal Judgement”)

KUNARAC et al.Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač, and Zoran Vuković, Case Nos IT-96-23-T and IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement, 22 February 2001 (“Kunarac et al. Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač, and Zoran Vuković, Case Nos IT-96-23 and IT-96-23/1-A, Judgement, 12 June 2002 (“Kunarac et al. Appeal Judgement”)

KUPREŠKIĆ et al.Prosecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić, Mirjan Kupreškić, Vlatko Kupreškić, Drago Josipović, and Vladimir Šantić, Case No. IT-95-16-A, Appeal Judgement, 23 October 2001 (“Kupreškić et al. Appeal Judgement”)

KVOČKA et al.Prosecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Milojica Kos, Mlađo Radić, Zoran Žigić, and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-T, Judgement, 2 November 2001 (“Kvočka et al. Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Mlađo Radić, Zoran Žigić, and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-A, Judgement, 28 February 2005 (“Kvočka et al. Appeal Judgement”)

LIMAJ et al.Prosecutor v. Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala, and Isak Musliu, Case No. IT-03-66-A, Judgement, 27 September 2007 (“Limaj et al. Appeal Judgement”)

LUKIĆ AND LUKIĆProsecutor v. Milan Lukić and Sredoje Lukić, Case No. IT-98-32/1-A, Judgement, 4 December 2012 (“Lukić and Lukić Appeal Judgement”)

MARTIĆProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-T, Judgement, 12 June 2007 (“Martić Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-A, Judgement, 8 October 2008 (“Martić Appeal Judgement”)

D. MILOŠEVIĆProsecutor v. Dragomir Milošević, Case No. IT-98-29/1-A, Judgement, 12 November 2009 (“D. Milošević Appeal Judgement”)

MILUTINOVIĆ et al.Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović, Nikola Šainović, Dragoljub Ojdanić, Nebojša Pavković, Vladimir Lazarević, and Sreten Lukić, Case No. IT-05-87-T, Judgement, 26 February 2009 (“Trial Judgement”)

MRKŠIĆ  et al.Prosecutor v. Mile Mrkšić, Miroslav Radić, and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. IT-95-13/1-T, Judgement, 27 September 2007 (“Mrkšić et al. Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Mile Mrkšić and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. 95-13/1-A, Judgement, 5 May 2009 (“Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal Judgement”)

NALETILIĆ AND MARTINOVIĆProsecutor v. Mladen Naletilić and Vinko Martinović, Case No. IT-98-34-A, Judgement, 3 May 2006 (“Naletilić and Martinović Appeal Judgement”)

D. NIKOLIĆProsecutor v. Dragan Nikolić, Case No. IT-94-2-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 4 February 2005 (“D. Nikolić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

M. NIKOLIĆProsecutor v. Momir Nikolić, Case No. IT-02-60/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 8 March 2006 (“M. Nikolić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

ORIĆProsecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-T, Judgement, 30 June 2006 (“Orić Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-A, Judgement, 3 July 2008 (“Orić Appeal Judgement”)

PERIŠIĆProsecutor v. Momčilo Perišić, Case No. IT-04-81-A, Judgement, 28 February 2013 (“Perišić Appeal Judgement”)

POPOVIĆ et al.Prosecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, and Vinko Pandurević, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Judgement, 7 May 1997 (“Popović et al. Trial Judgement”)

SIMIĆProsecutor v. Blagoje Simić, Miroslav Tadić and Simo Zarić, Case No. IT-95-9-T, Judgement, 17 October 2003 (“Simić et al. Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Blagoje Simić, Case No. IT-95-9-A, Judgement, 28 November 2006 (“Simić Appeal Judgement”)

STAKIĆProsecutor v. Milomir Stakić, Case No. IT-97-24-A, Judgement, 22 March 2006 (“Stakić Appeal Judgement”)

STRUGARProsecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-T, Judgement, 31 January 2005 (“Strugar Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-A, Judgement, 17 July 2008 (“Strugar Appeal Judgement”)

TADIĆProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Opinion and Judgment, 7 May 1997 (“Tadić Trial Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Judgement, 15 July 1999 (“Tadić Appeal Judgement”)Prosecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case Nos IT-94-1-A and IT-94-1-Abis, Judgement in Sentencing Appeals, 26 January 2000 (“Tadić Judgement on Sentencing Appeal”)

TOLIMIRProsecutor v. Zdravko Tolimir, Case No. IT-05-88/2-T, Judgement, 12 December 2012 (“Tolimir Trial Judgement”)

VASILJEVIĆProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-A, Judgement, 25 February 2004 (“Vasiljević Appeal Judgement”)
2.   ICTR

AKAYESUThe Prosecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No. ICTR-96-4-A, Judgment, 1 June 2001 (“Akayesu Appeal Judgement”)

BAGOSORA AND NSENGIYUMVAThéoneste Bagosora and Nsengiyumva v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-98-41-A, Judgement, 14 December 2011 (“Bagosora and Nsengiyumva Appeal Judgement”)

BIKINDISimon Bikindi v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-01-72-A, Judgement, 18 March 2010 (“Bikindi Appeal Judgement”)

GACUMBITSISylvestre Gacumbitsi v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-2001-64-A, Judgement, 7 July 2006 (“Gacumbitsi Appeal Judgement”)

GATETEJean-Baptiste Gatete v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-00-61-A, Judgement, 9 October 2012 (“Gatete Appeal Judgement”)

HATEGEKIMANAIldephonse Hategekimana v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-00-55B-A, Judgement, 8 May 2012 (“Hategekimana Appeal Judgement”)

KALIMANZIRACallixte Kalimanzira v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-05-88-A, Judgement, (“Kalimanzira Appeal Judgement”)

KAMBANDAJean Kambanda v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-97-23-A, Judgement, 19 October 2000 (“Kambanda Appeal Judgement”)

KARERAFrançois Karera v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-01-74-A, Judgement, 2 February 2009 (“Karera Appeal Judgement”)

MUHIMANAMikaeli Muhimana v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-95-1B-A, Judgement, 21 May 2007 (“Muhimana Appeal Judgement”)

MUGENZI  AND MUGIRANEZAJustin Mugenzi and Prosper Mugiraneza v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-99-50-A, Judgement, 4 Feb 2013 (“Mugenzi and Mugiraneza Appeal Judgement”)

MUNYAKAZIThe Prosecutor v. Yussuf Munyakazi,  Case No. ICTR-97-36A-A, Judgement, 28 September 2011 (“Munyakazi Appeal Judgement”)

MUVUNYI ITharcisse Muvunyi v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-00-55A-A, Judgement, 29 August 2008 (“Muvunyi I Appeal Judgement”)

MUVUNYI IITharcisse Muvunyi v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-00-55A-A, Judgement, 1 April 2011 (“Muvunyi II Appeal Judgement”)

NAHIMANA et al.Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, and Hassan Ngeze v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-99-52-A, Judgement, 28 November 2007 (“Nahimana et al. Appeal Judgement”)

NCHAMIHIGOSiméon Nchamihigo v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-01-63-A, Judgement, 18 March 2010 (“Nchamihigo Appeal Judgement”)

NDINDABAHIZIEmmanuel Ndindabahizi v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-01-71-A, Judgement, 16 January 2007 (“Ndindabahizi Appeal Judgement”)

NIYITEGEKAEliézer Niyitegeka v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-96-14-A, Judgement, 9 July 2004 (“Niyitegeka Appeal Judgement”)

NTABAKUZEAloys Ntabakuze v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-98-41A-A, Judgement, 8 May 2012 (“Ntabakuze Appeal Judgement”)

NTAGERURA et al.The Prosecutor v. André Ntagerura, Emmanuel Bagambiki, and Samuel Imanishimwe, Case No. ICTR-99-46-A, Judgement, 7 July 2006 (“Ntagerura et al. Appeal Judgement”)

NTAKIRUTIMANAThe Prosecutor v. Elizaphan Ntakirutimana and Gérard Ntakirutimana, Case Nos ICTR-96-10-A and ICTR-96-17-A, Judgement, 13 December 2004 (“Ntakirutimana Appeal Judgement”)

NTAWUKULILYAYODominique Ntawukulilyayo v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-05-82-A, Judgement, 14 December 2011 (“Ntawukulilyayo Appeal Judgement”)

RENZAHOTharcisse Renzaho v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-97-31-A, Judgement, 1 April 2011 (“Renzaho Appeal Judgement”)

RUKUNDOEmmanuel Rukundo v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-2001-70-A, Judgement, 20 October 2010 (“Rukundo Appeal Judgement”)

RUTAGANDAGeorges Anderson Nderubumwe Rutaganda v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-96-3-A, Judgement, 26 May 2003 (“Rutaganda Appeal Judgement”)

SEMANZALaurent Semanza v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-97-20-A, Judgement, 20 May 2005 (“Semanza Appeal Judgement”)

SEROMBAThe Prosecutor v. Athanase Seromba, Case No. ICTR-01-66-A, Judgement, 12 March 2008 (“Seromba Appeal Judgement”)

SIMBAAloys Simba v. The Prosecutor, Case No. ICTR-01-76-A, Judgement, 27 November 2007 (“Simba Appeal Judgement”)
3.   Special Court for Sierra Leone

TAYLORProsecutor v. Charles Ghankay Taylor, Case No. SCSL-03-01-A, Judgment, 26 September 2013 (“Taylor Appeal Judgement”)
4.   European Court of Human Rights

Acquaviva v. France, Application No. 19248/91, Judgment, 21 November 1995

Artico v. Italy, Application No. 6694/74, Judgment, 13 May 1990

Moreira de Azevedo v. Portugal, Application No. 11296/84, Judgment, 28 August 1991

Daud v. Portugal, Application No. 22600/93, Judgment, 21 April 1998

Doran v. Ireland, Application No. 50389/99, Judgment, 31 July 2003

Fretté v. France, Application No. 36515/97, Judgment, 26 February 2002

Galstyan v. Armenia, Application No. 26986/03, Judgment, 15 November 2007

Kornev and Karpenko v. Ukraine, Application No. 17444/04, Judgment, 21 October 2010

Krasniki v. The Czech Republic, Application No. 51277/99, Judgment, 28 February 2006

Kostovski v. The Netherlands, Application No. 1145/85, Judgment, 20 November 1989

Kress v. France, Application No. 39594/98, Judgment, 7 June 2001

Moiseyev v. Russia, Application No. 62936/00, Judgment, 9 October 2008

Natunen v. Finland, Application No. 21022/04, Judgment, 31 March 2009

Philis v. Greece (no. 2), Application No. 19773/92, Judgment, 27 June 1997

P.S. v. Germany, Application No. 33900/96, Judgment, 20 December 2001

Saïdi v. France, Application No. 14647/89, Judgment, 20 September 1993

Užukauskas. v. Lithuania, Application No. 16965/04, Judgment, 6 July 2010

Van Mechelen v. The Netherlands, Application Nos 21363/93, 21364/93, 21427/93 and 22056/93, Judgment, 23 April 1997

Zhuk v. Ukraine, Application No. 45783/05, Judgment, 21 October 2010
5.   Human Rights Committee

Garfield Peart and Andrew Peart v. Jamaica, Human Rights Committee, Communication Nos
464/1991 482/1991, UN Doc. CCPR/C/54/D/464/1991 and 482/1991, 24 July 1995

Earl Pratt and Ivan Morgan v. Jamaica, Communication Nos 210/1986 and 225/1987, 6 April 1989

Perkins v. Jamaica, Human Rights Committee, Communication No. 733/1997, UN Doc. CCPR/C/63/D/733/1997
6.   Post-WWII cases

Trial  of  the  Major  War  Criminals  before  the  International  Military  Tribunal,  Nuremberg, 14 November 1945-1 October 1946 (“IMT Judgement”)

International Military Tribunal for  the  Far  East,  Judgment of  12 November 1948,  in  R.  John Pritchard ed., The Tokyo Major War Crimes Trial: The Records of the International Military Tribunal for the Far  East with an Authoritative Commentary and Comprehensive Guide (New York: The Edwin Mellen Press, 1998)

Trial of Gustav Becker, Wilhelm Weber and 18 Others, Permanent Military Tribunal at Lyon, 17 July 1947, in Law Reports of Trials of War Criminals: Selected and Prepared  by the United Nations   War   Crimes   Commission   (London:   His   Majesty’s   Stationery   Office,   1947-1949) (“UNWCC Law Reports”), vol. VII, pp. 67-73

Trial of Karl Adam Golkel and Thirteen Others, British Military Court, Wuppertal, Germany, 15-21 May 1946, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. V, pp. 45-53

Trial of Franz Holstein and 23 Others, Permanent Military Tribunal at Dijon, 3 February 1947, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. VIII, pp. 22-33 (“Holstein case”)

The Jaluit Atoll Case, Trial of Rear-Admiral Nisuke Masuda and Four Others of the Imperial Japanese Navy, Unites States Military Commission, Marshall Islands, 7-13 December 1945, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. I, pp. 71-80

The   Roechling   Case   –    Indictment,   Judgment,   and   Judgment   on   Appeal,   dated   on 25 November 1947, 30 June 1948, and 25 January 1949, respectively, in Trials of War Criminals Before  the  Nuernberg  Military  Tribunals  Under  Control  Council  Law  No.  10,  Nuernberg, October 1946  –  April 1949  (Washington,  D.C.:  U.S.  Government  Printing  Office,  1949-1953) (“Trials before NMTs”), vol. XIV, pp. 1061-1143 (“Roechling case”)

Trial of Werner Rohde and Eight Others, British Military Court, Wuppertal, Germany, 29 May – 1 June 1946, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. V, pp. 54-59 (“Rohde case”)

The  Almelo  Trial,  Trial  of  Otto  Sandrock  and  Three  Others,  British  Military  Court,  Almelo, Holland, 24-26 November 1945, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. I, pp. 35-45

Trial of Franz Schonfeld and Nine Others, British Military Court, Essen, 11-26 June 1946, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. XI, pp. 64-73 (“Schonfeld case”)

The Zyklon B Case, Trial of Bruno Tesch and Two Others, British Military Court, Hamburg, 1-8 March 1946, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. I, pp. 93-103 (“Zyklon B case”)

Trial of Lobert Wagner, Gauleiter and Head of the Civil Government of Alsace during the Occupation and Six Others, Permanent Military Tribunal at Strasbourg, 23 April – 3 May 1946, and Court of Appeal, 24 July 1946, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. III, pp. 23-55 (“Wagner case”)

Trial of Max Wielen and 17 Others, the Stalag Luft III Case, British Military Court, Hamburg, Germany, 1 July -3 September 1947, in UNWCC Law Reports, vol. XI, pp. 31-52 (“Stalag Luft III case”)

United States of America v. Josef Altstoetter et al., Military Tribunal III, Opinion and Judgment, 3-4 December 1947, in Trials before NMTs, vol. III (“Justice case”)

United States of America v. Friedrich Flick et al., Opinion and Judgment, 22 December 1947, in Trials before NMTs, vol. VI (“Flick case”)

United States of America v. Carl Krauch et al., Opinion and Judgment of the United States Military Tribunal VI, 29-30 July 1948, in Trials before NMTs, vol. VIII (“Farben case”)

United States of America v. Otto Ohlendorf et al., Military Tribunal II-A, Opinion and Judgment, 8-9 April 1948, in Trials before NMTs, vol. IV (“Einsatzgruppen case”)

United States of America v. Oswald Pohl et al., Opinion and Judgment of the United States Military Tribunal II, 3 November 1947, in Trials before NMTs, vol. V (“Pohl case”)

United States of America v. Ernst von Weizsaecker et al., Military Tribunal IV, Judgment, 11-13 April 1949, in Trials before NMTs, vol. XIV (“Ministries case”)

Landgericht Hechingen, 28.6.1947, KLs 23/47 and Oberlandesgericht Tübingen, 20.1.1948, Ss 54/47, decision on appeal reported in Justiz und NS-Verbrechen, vol. I, pp. 469-502 (“Hechingen Deportation case”)

Strafsenat, Urteil vom 10. August 1948 gegen K. und A., STS 18/48 in Entscheidungen des Obersten Gerichtshofs für die Britische Zone. Entscheidungen in Strafsachen, vol. I (1949), pp. 53-56 (“Synagogue case”)

Strafsenat, Urteil vom 14. Dezember 1948 gegen L. und andere, StS 37/48 in Entscheidungen des Obersten Gerichtshofs für die Britische Zone. Entscheidungen in Strafsachen, Vol. I (1949), pp. 229-234 (“Pig-cart parade case”)
7.   Other Jurisdictions
(a)   Australia

Giorgianni v. R.  1985  156 CLR 473

R. v. Russell  1933  VLR 59
(b)   Belgium

Arrêt de la Cour de cassation de Belgique (Cass.), 28 September 2010, AR P.10.0099.N, Pasicrisie belge (Pas.), 2010, no 554
(c)   Canada

R. v. Briscoe  2010  1 S.C.R. 411

R. v. Hibbert  1995  2 S.C.R. 973
(d)   France

Arrêt de la chambre criminelle de la Cour de cassation (“Crim”.), 23 July 1927: Recueil Sirey, 1929. 1. 73

Crim., 21 October 1948: Bulletin des arrêt de la chambre criminelle de la Cour de cassation (“Bull. crim.”) no 242, 27 December 1960 and ibid., no 624

Crim., 17 May 1962: Bull. crim., no 200; Recueil Dalloz 1962. 473

Crim., 1 October 1984: Gazette du Palais 1985, Sommaires 96

Crim., 19 March 1986: Bull. crim., no 112

Crim., 26 March 1992: Droit pénal Dalloz 1992. 194

Crim., 28 June 1995: Bull. crim., no 241; Droit pénal Dalloz 1995. 274

Crim., 19 June 2001: Bull. crim., no 148; Droit pénal Dalloz 2001. 111
(e)   Hong Kong

R. v. Lam Kit  1988  1 HKC 679
(f)   Israel

Criminal Appeal 320/99, Plonit v. The State of Israel, PD 55(3) 22
(g)   Japan

2011 (A) No. 2249, decision of the Third Petty Bench of the Supreme Court of 15 April 2013, Keishu vol. 67, No. 4

1949 (Re) No. 1506, judgment of the Second Petty Bench of the Supreme Court of 1 October 1949, Keishu Vol. 3, No. 10
(h)   Luxembourg

Cour Supérieure de Justice (Cour d'appel siégeant en matière correctionnelle), 24 mars 1986, no 7/86 VI

Tribunal d'arrondissement de Luxembourg, 26 novembre 1987, no 1678/86, cités dans Pasicrisie luxembourgeoise, XXVII, (Sommaires), 93, no 18
(i)   Mexico

Suprema Corte de Justicia de la Nación, Tesis CXXI/2007, vol. XXV, June 2007

Contradicción de Tesis 414/2010, vol. VIII, May 2012 (j)   New Zealand

Mahana Makarini Edmonds v. R  2011  NZSC 159
(k)   South Africa

Tladi v. S  2005  ZAFSHC 143
(l)   UK

Maxwell v. Director of Public Prosecutions for Northern Ireland  1979  68 Cr. App. R. 128

National Coal Board v. Gamble  1959  1 Q.B.11

R. v. Bryce  2004  2 Cr.App.R. 35
(m)   US

Aziz v. Alcolac, Inc., 658 F3d 388 (4th Cir. 2011)

Kiobel v. Royal Dutch Petroleum Co., 621 F.3d 111 (2nd Cir. 2010)

Nye & Nissen v. United States, 336 U.S. 613 (1949)

Presbyterian Church of Sudan v. Talisman Energy, 582 F.3d 244 (2nd Cir. 2009)

United States v. Bancalari, 110 F.3d 1425 (9th Cir. 1997)

United States v. Delgado, 357 F.3d 1061(9th Cir. 2004) United States v. Gaskins, 849 F.2d 454 (9th Cir. 1988) United States v. Landerman, 109 F.3d 1053 (5th Cir. 1997)

United States v. Leos-Quijada, 107 F.3d 786 (10th Cir. 1997)

United States v. Lucas, 67 F.3d 956 (D.C. Cir. 1995) United States v. McKneely, 69 F.3d 1067 (10th Cir.1995) United States v. Peoni, 100 F.2d 401 (2nd Cir. 1938) United States v. Roach, 28 F.3d 729 (8th Cir. 1991)

United States v. Williamson, 53 F.3d 1500 (10th Cir. 1995)

United States v. Woods, 148 F.3d 843 (7th Cir. 1998)
B.   Defined Terms and Abbreviations



Additional Protocol I

Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts (Protocol I), Geneva, 8 June 1977



ACHR

American Convention on Human Rights



Appeals Chamber

Appeals Chamber of the Tribunal



Appellants

Nikola Šainović, Dragoljub Ojdanić, Nebojša Pavković, Vladimir Lazarević, and Sreten Lukić collectively



B/C/S

Bosnian/Croatian/Serbian



CLSS

Conference and Language Service Section



Commission for Cooperation with the KVM or Commission

Commission of the Federal Government for the Co-operation with the OSCE Mission for Verification in Kosovo and Metohija



Ðaković’s Notes or Notes

Handwritten notes taken by Milan Ðaković entitled “Meetings of the Joint Command for Kosovo and Metohija”, which record the daily meetings held in Priština/Prishtina between 22 July and 30 October 1998 (Exhibit P1468)



ECHR

European Convention on Human Rights



ECtHR

European Court of Human Rights



EDS

Electronic Disclosure Suite



EU-KDOM

European Union Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission



Exh.

Exhibit



FRY

Federal Republic of Yugoslavia



HRCee

Human Rights Committee



ICC

International Criminal Court



ICC Statute

Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court



ICCPR

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights



ICRC

International Committee of the Red Cross



ICTR

International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda



IDs

Identity documents



ILC

International Law Commission



ILC Draft Code

Draft Code of Crimes against the Peace and Security of Mankind adopted by the ILC in 1996



IMT Charter

Charter of the International Military Tribunal of 8 August 1945



IMTFE

International Military Tribunal for the Far East



Indictment

Prosecutor   v.  Milan  Milutinović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-PT,  Third Amended Joinder Indictment, 21 June 2006



JCE

Joint Criminal Enterprise



JDB

Tribunal's Judicial Database



JNA

Yugoslav People’s Army



JSO

Special Operations Unit of the MUP State Security Department



KiM

Kosovo and Metohija



KLA

Kosovo Liberation Army



KVM

Kosovo Verification Mission



Lazarević’s Appeal Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, General Vladimir Lazarević’s  Refiled  Appeal  Brief,  2 October 2009  (confidential);  public redacted version filed on 25 May 2010



Lazarević’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-T, Vladimir Lazarevic’s    sic    Final  Trial  Brief,  15 July 2008  (confidential);  public redacted  version  filed  on  29 July 2008,  reclassified  as  confidential  on 22 February 2010; public redacted version refiled on 25 May 2010



Lazarević’s Notice of Appeal

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Vladimir Lararevic’s  sic  Defence Notice of Appeal, 27 May 2009



Lazarević’s Reply Brief

Prosecutor  v.  Nikola  Šainović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Lazarević Defence  Reply  Brief,  15 February 2010  (confidential);  public  redacted version filed on 10 October 2013



Lazarević’s Response Brief

Prosecutor  v.  Nikola  Šainović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Lazarević Defence Respondent’s Brief, 2 November 2009



Lukić’s Appeal Brief

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Defense Appelant’s  sic  Brief Refiled, 7 October 2009



Lukić’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-T, Sreten Lukic’s sic   Final  Defense  Trial  Brief,  15 July 2008  (confidential);  corrigendum filed on 18 July 2008; public redacted version filed on 7 August 2008



Lukić’s Notice of Appeal

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Sreten Lukic’s sic  Notice of Appeal from Judgment and Request for Leave to Exceed the Page Limit, 27 May 2009



Lukić’s Reply Brief

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Sreten Lukic’s sic 	Reply 	Brief 	in 	Support 	of 	his 	Defense 	Appellant’s 	Brief,15 February 2010 	(confidential); 	public 	redacted 	version 	filed 	on 14 September 2010



Lukić’s Response Brief

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Sreten Lukic’s sic  Response to the Prosecution Appeal, 2 November 2009 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 31 August 2010



LDK

Democratic League of Kosovo



MNA

Marked Not Admitted



MUP

Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Serbia



MUP Staff

MUP Staff for Kosovo and Metohija



NATO

North Atlantic Treaty Organization



October Agreements

Agreements  brokered  in  October  1998:  these  included  the  Holbrooke- Milošević  Agreement, the KVM Agreement, the NATO-FRY Agreement, and the Clark-Naumann Agreement



Ojdanić’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-T, General Dragoljub  Ojdanić’s  Closing  Brief,  15 July 2008  (confidential);  public redacted version filed on 15 July 2008; public redacted version refilled on 29 July 2008



OLAD

Office of Legal Aid and Detention Matters



OMPF

Office of Missing Persons and Forensics



OMPF List

A list of missing persons prepared by the OMPF (Exhibit P2798)



Original Indictment

Prosecutor  v. Milan Milutinović et al.,  Case No. IT-99-37-I, Indictment, 23 May 1999, confirmed on 24 May 1999 and made public on 27 May 1999



OSCE

Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe



OUP

Sectors of the Interior of the MUP PJP 	Special Police Unit of the MUP



Pavković’s Appeal Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, General Pavković’s Amended Appeal Brief, 30 September 2009, annexed to General Pavković’s Submission of his Amended Appeal Brief, 30 September 2009



Pavković’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-T, Final Brief of Nebojša Pavković, 15 July 2008 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 28 July 2008



Pavković’s Notice of Appeal

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Notice of Appeal from the Judgement of 26 February 2009, annexed to General Pavković Submission of his Amended Notice of Appeal, 29 September 2009



Pavković’s Reply Brief

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,   Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  General Pavković’s  Reply  to  Prosecution  Response  to  Amended  Appeal  Brief, 15 February 2010



Pavković’s Response Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, General Pavković Reply to Prosecution Appeal Brief, 2 November 2009



Pavković’s Supplemental Appeal Brief

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,   Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  General Pavković’s Supplemental Brief, 8 March 2010



Plan for Combating Terrorism

A plan comprising both military and political measures for suppressing and combating  terrorism  in  Kosovo,  formally  adopted  on  21 July 1998  in  a meeting convened by Milošević at Beli Dvor, his official residence, in Belgrade



Prosecution

Office of the Prosecutor of the Tribunal



Prosecution’s Appeal Brief

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Appeal Brief, 10 August 2009 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 21 August 2009



Prosecution’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor  v. Milan Milutinović et al.,  Case No. IT-05-87-T, Final Trial Brief, 	15 July 2008 	(confidential); 	public 	redacted 	version 	filed 	on 29 July 2008



Prosecution’s Reply Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Prosecution’s Consolidated Reply Brief, 17 November 2009 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 1 September 2010



Prosecution’s Notice of Appeal

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Notice of Appeal, 27 May 2009



Prosecution’s Response Brief (Lazarević)

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Response to Appeal of Vladimir Lazarević, 15 January 2010 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 14 May 2010



Prosecution’s Response Brief (Lukić)

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Refiled Prosecution   Response   to   Appeal   of   Sreten   Lukić,   3 February 2010 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 19 April 2010



Prosecution’s Response Brief (Pavković)

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Response to General Pavković’s Amended Appeal Brief, 15 January 2010 (confidential);  corrigendum  filed  on  26  February  2010;  public  redacted version filed on 26 February 2010; corrigendum to public redacted version filed on 1 March 2010



Prosecution’s Response Brief (Šainović)

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Response to Šainović’s Brief, 15 January 2010 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 29 January 2010; corrigendum to public redacted version filed on 17 February 2010



Prosecution’s Supplemental Response Brief (Pavković)

Prosecutor  v. Nikola Šainović  et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A, Prosecution Response to General Pavković’s Supplemental Brief, 18 March 2010



RDB

Resora Drzavne Bezbednosti (State Security Department)



RJB

Resor Javne Bezbednosti (Public Security Department)



RPOs

Reserve Police Detachments or Reserve Police Squads



Ru-KDOM

Russia Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission



Rules

The Tribunal’s Rules of Procedure and Evidence



Šainović’s Appeal Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Defence Appeal Brief, 23 December 2009



Sainović’s Closing Brief

Prosecutor v. Milan Milutinović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-T, Defence Submission Final Trial Brief, 15 July 2008 (confidential); public redacted version filed on 29 July 2008"



Šainović’s Notice of Appeal

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Defence Submission Notice of Appeal, 27 May 2009



Šainović’s Reply Brief

Prosecutor v. Nikola Šainović et al., Case No. IT-05-87-A, Defence Brief in Reply,  15 February 2010  (confidential);  public  redacted  version  filed  on 22 July 2010



Šainović’s Response Brief

Prosecutor   v.  Nikola  Šainović   et  al.,  Case  No.  IT-05-87-A,  Defence Respondent’s Brief, 2 November 2009



SAJ

Special Anti-Terrorist Units of the MUP



SDC

Supreme Defence Council



SMB

Olive-green-grey uniform used by the VJ



SPS

Socialist Party of Serbia



Statute

Statute of the Tribunal



SUP

Sekretarijat Unutrašnjih Poslova (Secretariat of the Interior)



TEC

Provisional or Temporary Executive Council of the Autonomous Province of Kosovo and Metohija



Trial Chamber

Trial Chamber III of the Tribunal



Tribunal

International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991



UK

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland



UN

United Nations



UN Security Council Resolution 1199 or Resolution 1199

United Nations Security Council Resolution issued on 23 September 1998, which expressed grave concern “at the recent intense fighting in Kosovo and in particular the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by Serbian security forces and the Yugoslav Army which have resulted in numerous civilian casualties and, according to the estimate of the Secretary-General, the displacement of over 230,000 persons from their homes”



US

United States of America



US-KDOM

United States Kosovo Diplomatic Observer Mission



VJ

Army of Yugoslavia



Working Group

A working group sent to Kosovo in 1998, consisting of three SPS members, Milomir Minić, Dušan Matković, and Zoran Anđelković