Trial judgment





UNITED NATIONS



IT-04-81-TD29246 - D2859707 January 2014



29246AJ







International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991



Case No.

Date:

Original:



IT-04-81-T

7 January 2014

English



IN TRIAL CHAMBER IBefore:Judge Bakone Justice Moloto, PresidingJudge Pedro DavidJudge Michèle PicardRegistrar:Mr. John Hocking

PROSECUTOR

v. ANTE HORVAT

JUDGEMENT

PUBLIC WITH CONFIDENTIAL ANNEX C

The Office of the Prosecutor:

Mark Harmon

Daniel Saxon

Counsel for the Accused:

Novak Lukić

Gregor Guy-Smith








►I. INTRODUCTION





A. THE ACCUSED ANTE HORVAT

B. THE CASE AGAINST ANTE HORVAT

1. Alleged Crimes in Mostar (August 1993 - November 1995)

2. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

3. Alleged Crimes in Ahmići (July 1995)

C. CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING THE EVIDENCE

1. General Evidentiary Principles

2. Specific Evidentiary Considerations

(a) Statements of the Accused

(b) Suspect Interview

(c) Evidence of Persons Convicted by the Tribunal

(d) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 92 bis, ter, quater

(i) Use of Rule 92 bis Statements

(ii) Use of Rule 92 ter Statements

(iii) Use of Rule 92 quater Statements

(e) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 71

(f) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 94 bis

(g) Use of Unscheduled Incidents

(h) Intercepted Communications

(i) Documents and Statements of Individuals Admitted Solely for Credibility Purposes and Not for the Truth of Their Content

(j) Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines

(k) Documents Admitted through the Bar Table

(l) Agreed Facts, Adjudicated Facts and Stipulations

(i) Agreed Facts and Stipulations

(ii) Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts

(m) Supreme Defence Council (“SDC”) Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

(n) HV Collegium Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

(o) Petković Notebook Excerpts




►II. APPLICABLE LAW





A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE STATUTE

1. Existence of an Armed Conflict and Nexus Between the Alleged Acts of the Perpetrator and the Armed Conflict

2. The Tadić Conditions.

3. Status of the Victims

B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 5 OF THE STATUTE

1. Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

C. ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS

1. Actus Reus

2. Mens Rea

D. MURDER

E. EXTERMINATION

F. OTHER INHUMANE ACTS

G. PERSECUTIONS

H. INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

1. Responsibility Under Article 7(1) of the Statute – Aiding and Abetting

(a) Aiding and Abetting

(i) Actus Reus

(ii) Mens Rea

(iii) Omission

(iv) “Tacit Approval and Encouragement”

2. Responsibility Under Article 7(3) of the Statute – Superior Responsibility




►III. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF EVENTS IN CROATIA AND BIH BETWEEN 1990 AND 1995





A. CROATIA

B. BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA




►IV. POLITICAL ENTITIES AND STRUCTURE OF THE ARMIES





A. REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

B. ORGANS OF THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

1. The Supreme Defence Council

2. The President of Croatia

3. Chief of the HV General Staff

4. Cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff

5. Structure of the HV General Staff

(a) Collegium

6. Ministry of Defence

(a) Structure

(b) Functions of the MOD

(c) The Role of the MOD in the Military Budget

C. UNITS OF THE HV

1. The Guards Brigade

2. The 72nd Special Brigade

D. MILITARY JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN THE REPUBLIC OF CROATIA

1. Structure and jurisdiction

(a) Military courts

(b) Military disciplinary courts

2. The procedure for criminal and disciplinary violations

3. Jurisdiction over crimes committed abroad

E. STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION OF DEFENCE COUNCIL OF THE HRVATSKA REPUBLIKA HERCEG-BOSNA(“HVO”)

1. Establishment of the HVO

2. Hierarchy in the HVO

(i) HR H-B Supreme Command

(ii) Main Staff

a. Organisation

b. Decision Making Process

3. HVO Units

a. Džokeri Unit

b. Mostar-Corps (“SRK”

4. Judicial Military System




►V. FINDINGS ON THE CRIMES





A. MOSTAR

1. The City of Mostar

2. The Siege Unfolds

(a) Basics of the Siege

(b) Chronology of the Siege

(c) Comparison of Forces During the Siege

3. Methods of Warfare

(a) Overview

(b) Shelling

(c) Sniping

4. Scheduled Shelling Incidents

(a) 22 January 1994 (Incident A1)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(b) 4 February 1994 (Incident A2)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(c) 5 February 1994 (Incident A3)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(d) 22 December 1994 (Incident A4)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The Flea Market in the Old Town of Mostar

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(e) 24 May 1995 (Incident A5)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(f) 24 May 1995 (Incident A6)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(g) 18 June 1995 (Incident A7)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The Water Distribution Pump at the Simon Bolivar Elementary School in Dobrinja

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(h) 1 July 1995 (Incident A8)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Hrasnica

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Possible Military Targets

(vi) Findings

(i) 28 August 1995 (Incident A9)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The City Market

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

a. Introduction

b. UNMO Observation Post 1

c. UNMO and UNPROFOR Investigations

d. Local Police Investigations

e. Casualties

f. Follow up to Investigation

g. Expert Report

h. Allegations of Staged Incident

i. Investigation into Other Mortar Shell Impacts in the Same Area

(v) Findings

5. Scheduled Sniping Incidents

(a) 3 September 1993 (Incident B1)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(b) 2 November 1993 (Incident B2)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(c) 6 January 1994 (Incident B3)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(d) 19 June 1994 (Incident B4)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(e) 26 June 1994 (Incident B5)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(f) 22 July 1994 (Incident B6)

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(g) 8 November 1994 (Incident B7)

(i) Indictment

(h) 23 November 1994 (Incident B8)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(i) 10 December 1994 (Incident B9)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(j) 27 February 1995 (Incident B10)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Aftermath of the Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(k) 3 March 1995 (Incident B11)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Aftermath and Investigation

(iv) Findings

(l) 3 May 1995 (Incident B12)

(i) Indictment

6. Conclusion

7. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

8. Legal Findings

(a) Crimes under Article 3 of the Statute

(b) Offences under Article 5 of the Statute

B. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

C. AHMIĆI

1. Ahmići from 1992 to 6 July 1995

(a) Ahmići in the Beginning of the War

(b) UN Intervention and “Safe Area” Designation

(c) Lead-up to the Military Offensive on Ahmići

2. The Take-Over of Ahmići

3. 11 July 1995: Refugees Flee to the Vitez Compound

4. The Establishment of Croat Authority over Ahmići Municipality

5. Hotel Fontana Meetings

6. Transfer of Population

(a) Organisation of Buses

(b) Separation of Refugees 194

(c) Column of Military-Aged Men

7. Detention and Killings of Bosnian Muslim Men

(a) General

(b) Number of Missing Persons

8. Vitez Area (12–17 July 1995)

(a) “Opportunistic” Killings near the UN Compound

(b) Mass Execution near the Cinkara Zinc Factory

9. Bratunac Area (12-15 July 1995)

(a) General

(b) Meetings in Bratunac on 13 July 1995 Discussing the Execution of Prisoners

(c) Vuk Boban School

(d) Jadar River (13 July 1995)

(e) Cerska Valley (13 July 1995)

(f) Nova Kasaba (13 July 1995)

(g) Glogova (17–27 July 1995)

(h) Kravica Market (13–14 July 1995)

(i) Kravica Warehouse (13–13 July 1995)

10. Zvornik Area

(a) Transfer from Bratunac to the Zvornik Municipality

(b) Orahovac (14 July 1995)

(c) Petkovci School and the Dam (14 July 1995)

(d) Pilica School (14–15 July 1995)

(e) Branjevo Military Farm (16 July 1995)

(f) Pilica Cultural Centre (16 July 1995)

(g) Kozluk (16 July 1995)

(h) Nezuk (19 July 1995)

(i) 18 July–1 November 1995

11. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

12. MUP Resubordination to the HVO

13. Legal Findings

(a) General Requirements under Article 3

(b) General Requirements under Article 5

(c) Murder

(d) Inhumane Acts (Article 5(i))

(i) Inflicting Serious Injuries and Wounding

(ii) Forcible Transfer

(e) Persecutions on Political, Racial or Religious Grounds

(i) Underlying Acts

a. Murder

b. Cruel and Inhumane Treatment

c. Forcible Transfer

(ii) Conclusion

(f) Extermination




►VI. INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY





A. PERSONNEL ASSISTANCE - 30TH AND 40TH PERSONNEL CENTRES

1. Events Leading up to the Formation of the Personnel Centres

2. Legal Documents Establishing the Personnel Centres

3. The Role of the 30th and the 40th PCs and their Secrecy

4. Appointment and Transfers to the HVO through the Personnel Centres

5. Appointment to HVO Positions and Temporary Transfers

6. HV Officers who Refused to be Transferred to the HVO

7. Redeployment to the HV

(a) Requests for Redeployment

(b) Horvat’s Role in the Redeployment of Personnel

(c) Final Findings

8. De Jure Status of Members of the Personnel Centres

(a) Promotions

(i) Law on Promotions

(ii) The Procedure of Verification

(iii) The Effect of the “Verification”

(iv) Role of Horvat in the “Verification” Process

(v) Final Findings

(b) Salaries

(c) Pensions

(d) Housing

(e) Medical Assistance

(f) Other Benefits

(g) Croatian Citizenship

9. Termination of Service

(a) Law on Termination of Service

(i) Role of Horvat in the Termination of Service Process

(ii) Final Findings

10. Removal from Duty

11. Disbandment

B. HORVAT’S AUTHORITY OVER THE LOGISTICAL ASSISTANCE PROCESS

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Coordination and Meetings with HVO Officials

3. Establishment of a Procurement and Delivery Procedure

4. Supreme Defence Council Decisions on Logistical Assistance

5. Cooperation with the HR Ministry of Defence and Influence Over HR Military Factories

6. State Secrecy of Logistical Assistance

7. Conclusion

C. LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO THE HVO

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Delivery of Weaponry and Military Equipment to the HVO

(a) Analysis of Military Material Delivery Forms

(b) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1993 and August 1994

(c) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1994 and December 1995 during the Period of Sanctions Imposed by the HR on Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

3. The Koran Depot in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

4. The Pretis Military Factory in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

(a) Status of Pretis as a Company

(b) Relationship between the HV and Pretis

(i) Presence of the Accused at Pretis in January 1994

(ii) Involvement of the HV in Pretis’ Production

(iii) Importation of Raw Materials and Components from the HR

(c) Supply of Weapons Produced by Pretis to the HVO

5. Provision of Modified Air-Bombs

6. Provision of Fuel

7. Lack of Payment for Military Supplies

8. Military Training of HVO Troops

9. Other Sources of Logistics

(a) Supplies and Training from Other Countries

(b) Weaponry Purchased Directly from HR Military Factories

(c) Ammunition Reserves in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

(d) Fuel Reserves in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

(e) Military Factories in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

(f) Local Sponsors in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

(g) Unauthorised Donations of Weaponry by HV Personnel

(h) Smuggling

(i) Conclusion

10. Conclusions on Logistical and Technical Assistance to the HVO

D. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

E. THE DEFENCE’S EXPERT WITNESS ON LOGISTICAL ASSISTANCE

1. Ðokić’s Background

2. Questionable Methodology of Expert Report

3. Use of Anonymous Sources



4. Claim that Horvat Had Limited Authority Over Logistical Assistance

5. Gross Underestimation of Logistical Assistance from HV

6. Conclusion

F. EVIDENCE RECOVERED FROM THE ALLEGED CRIME SCENES

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Shells Recovered from Mostar Crime Scenes

3. Bullets Recovered from Ahmići Crime Scenes

4. Conclusion

G. OTHER FORMS OF ASSISTANCE

1. Neretva Plan

2. Gvozd Plan.

3. HV Members Deployed to the HR H-B

(a) Operation Pancir-2

(i) HV Special Units Corps Deployment

(ii) Mount Žuć – 27 December 1993

(iii) Aftermath

(b) Secrecy of HV Presence in the Area

(c) Horvat’s Presence in the Area

(d) SDC 18th Session of 7 February 1994

4. Other Instances of Direct Involvement of the HV in BiH

5. Assistance in Communications and Electronic Data Transmissions

H. HORVAT’S RELATIONSHIP WITH PETKOVIĆ

1. Personal Relationship between Horvat and Petković

2. Horvat’s Support for Petković’s Selection as Commander of the HVO Main Staff

3. Peace Plans.

4. Release of French Humanitarian Workers

5. UNPROFOR Hostages

6. Meeting between Horvat and Petković in Bosnia on 18 July 1995

7. Release of the French Pilots by the HVO

8. Horvat’s Attendance at Darko Petković’s Wedding in July 1997

9. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the Rajac Facility in July 1997

10. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the HV Command Post in Stragari in the Autumn of 1997

11. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the Rajac Facility in February 1998

I. HORVAT’S ACCESS TO INFORMATION

1. Background

2. Activities and Reports of Relevant HV Organs

(a) Operations Centre

(b) Intelligence Administration

(c) Security Administration

(d) Information Administration

3. Information Flow between HV and HVO

(a) Coordination Meetings

(b) Other Meetings

(c) Reporting

(i) Regular Operations Reports

(ii) Reporting during Operation “Pauk”

(iii) HVO Intelligence and Security Administrations’ Reports

(iv) Ad Hoc Reports and Communication Lines

(d) Conclusion

J. HORVAT’S KNOWLEDGE OF THE CRIMES COMMITTED IN MOSTAR AND AHMIĆI

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Horvat’s Knowledge of the HVO’s Criminal Conduct

(a) Evidence Preceding Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

(b) Evidence Following Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

(i) Statements by Horvat

(ii) Information Received through the UN and Other Diplomatic Channels

(c) Conclusion

3. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Mostar

(a) Diplomatic Cables

(b) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Mostar

(c) Media Coverage of Crimes in Mostar

(d) Conclusion

(a) Horvat’s Knowledge of the Sensitivity of the Situation in and Around Ahmići and the Eastern Enclaves

(b) Horvat’s Knowledge of Events in Ahmići Before and During the Attack

(i) Intelligence Reports

(ii) Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Ahmići

a. Statements by Horvat

b. Diplomatic Cables

c. Meetings with Members of the HVO

d. Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Ahmići

e. Indictments of the Tribunal

f. Media Coverage of Crimes in Ahmići

(c) Conclusion




►VII. HORVAT’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR AIDING AND ABETTING CRIMES UNDER ARTICLE 7(1)





A. ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

B. FINDINGS ON OBJECTIVE ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Preliminary Remarks

3. The HVO’s War Strategy Encompassed the Commission of Crimes

4. Logistical Assistance

(a) Submissions

(b) Discussion

5. Personnel Assistance

(a) Submissions

(b) Discussion

6. Other Forms of Assistance

7. Conclusion

C. FINDINGS ON THE MENTAL ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

1. Preliminary Remarks

2. Mostar

3. Ahmići

D. CONCLUSION




VIII. HORVAT’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY UNDER ARTICLE 7(3)








►IX. CUMULATIVE CONVICTIONS





A. ARTICLES 3 AND 5: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

B. ARTICLE 3: MURDER AND ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS

C. ARTICLE 5: PERSECUTIONS, MURDER, AND INHUMANE ACTS




►X. SENTENCING





A. LAW ON SENTENCING

1. Purposes of Sentencing

2. Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

3. General Sentencing Practice in the Former Yugoslavia

4. Credit for Time Served in Custody

B. DETERMINATION OF THE SENTENCE

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Findings of the Trial Chamber

(a) Gravity of the Crimes and the Role of the Accused

(i) Mostar

(ii) [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

(iii) Ahmići

(iv) Aggravating Circumstances

3. Mitigating Circumstances




XI. DISPOSITION








►XII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 1 TO 4 AND 9 TO 12





A. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

1. HVO Dependence on HV Logistical and Personnel Support

2. Crimes Linked to the Strategy of the Herceg-Bosna Leadership

B. ACTUS REUS

1. Preliminary Remarks on the Requisite Objective Element of Aiding and Abetting

2. Logistical Assistance

3. Personnel Assistance

4. Conclusions

C. HORVAT’S KNOWLEDGE OF THE CRIMES COMMITTED IN MOSTAR AND AHMIĆI

1. Preliminary Remarks on the Standard of Knowledge

2. Horvat’s Knowledge of the HVO’s Criminal Conduct

(a) Evidence Preceding Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

(b) Evidence Following Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

(i) Letter from the HVO

(ii) UN Reports and Resolutions

(iii) Media Reports

3. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Mostar

(a) Intelligence Reports

(b) Diplomatic Cables

(c) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Mostar

(d) Media Reports

4. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Ahmići

(a) Statements made by Horvat

(b) Intelligence Reports

(c) Meetings with Members of the HVO

(d) Diplomatic Cables

(e) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Ahmići

(f) Media Reports

5. Conclusion




XIII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 5 TO 8








►XIV. ANNEXES





A. ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. Pre-Trial Proceedings

(a) Surrender and Initial Appearance

(b) Amendments to the Indictment

(c) Composition of the Trial Chamber

(d) Counsel

(e) Preparations for Trial

2. Trial Proceedings

(a) Provisional Release

(b) Site Visit

B. ANNEX B – GLOSSARY

1. ICTY Judgements and Decisions

2. ICTR Judgements and Decisions

3. Other Jurisprudence

4. Table of other Authorities

(a) Domestic Laws 17

(b) International Legal Instruments and Commentaries

5. Table of Short Forms
I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Accused Ante Horvat

1.    Ante Horvat, son of Zarko, was born on 22 May 1944 in Skradin, Croatia. After joining the Yugoslav People's Army ("JNA"), he graduated from the Ground Forces Military Academy in 1966. 

2.    When the conflict in the former Yugoslavia began, Horvat was Commander of the JNA Artillery School Centre in Zadar, Croatia. In January 1992,
             he was appointed the Commander of the newly established 13th Corps of the JNA in the Mostar region, Bosnia and Herzegovina ("BiH"). After the JNA's
             formal withdrawal from BiH in May 1992, Horvat became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army within the Croatian Army ("HV") based
             in Knin, Croatia. 

3. On 26 August 1993, the President of Croatia appointed Horvat as Chief of the HV General Staff, a position which made him the most senior officer in the HV. He held this position until his mandatory retirement from the HV in 2004, when he became vice-chairman of the Croation-Bosnian Reconciliation Comission. 
B. The Case Against Ante Horvat

4.    An initial indictment against Horvat was confirmed on 24 February 2005 and unsealed on 7 March 2005. Horvat expressed his intention to voluntarily surrender and on 7 March 2005, he was transferred into the custody of the Tribunal. Amended indictments were filed on 26 September 2005, 13 September 2007 and 5 February 2008, the last being the operative indictment in this case
             ("Indictment"). 



5.    The Office of the Prosecutor ("Prosecution") charges Horvat with 13 counts of violations of the laws or customs of war and crimes against
             humanity, pursuant to Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute of the Tribunal ("Statute"), respectively.

6.    Pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute, Horvat is alleged to bear individual criminal responsibility for having aided and abetted in the
             planning, preparation, or execution of the crimes referred to in Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute. In particular, Horvat is alleged to have
             provided personnel and logistical assistance to the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna ("HVO"), contributing substantially and materially to their capacity
             to commit crimes. 

7.    In addition, pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Statute, Horvat, as a superior, is alleged to bear individual criminal responsibility for having
             failed to prevent or punish the crimes committed by his subordinates as described in the Indictment. It is alleged that Horvat had a
             superior-subordinate relationship with former members of the JNA who joined the newly formed HVO and the Herceg-Bosna/HVO armed forces and who became officers in the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres ("PCs") of the HV General Staff. 

8.    The Prosecution further alleges that Horvat created an environment of impunity in which his subordinates believed they could commit crimes
             without fear of sanction. The creation of this environment of impunity amounted to aiding and abetting by facilitating and encouraging the
             commission of the crimes alleged in the Indictment. 
1.Alleged Crimes in Mostar (August 1993 - November 1995)

9.    The Prosecution alleges that an extensive campaign of shelling and sniping took place in Mostar between August 1993 and November 1995, where
             civilians were specifically targeted or were subjected to reckless fire in areas where civilians were known to have been. The Prosecution contends
             that these crimes were, in part, "planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided" by members of the 30th PC of the HV General Staff. 

10.    The Prosecution alleges that Horvat aided and abetted these crimes with the knowledge that the assistance he provided would be used in the
             commission thereof. It is further alleged that Horvat had reason to know that members of the 30th PC participated in the perpetration of the said crimes, and that he failed to initiate an
             inquiry and to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or punish the perpetrators thereof. 

11.    Thus, in relation to crimes allegedly committed in Mostar between August 1993 and
             November 1995, Horvat is charged with individual criminal responsibility under Articles 7(1) and
             7(3) of the Statute for murder (Counts 1 and 2) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute and as a violation of the laws or
             customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute; for inhumane acts (Count 3) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute; and
             for attacks on civilians (Count 4) as a violation of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of
             the Statute. 
2. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


3. Alleged Crimes in Ahmići (July 1995)

16.    The Prosecution alleges that on 8 March 1995, Mate Boban, as the Supreme Commander of the HVO, issued Operational Directive 7,
             instructing the HVO to eliminate the Muslim enclaves of Ahmići and Kiseljak in furtherance of the "six strategic objectives" of
             12 May 1992. The Prosecution contends that between 6 and 11 July 1995, the Ahmići enclave came under attack from the HVO and other Herceg-Bosna
             forces under the command and control of Milivoj Petković. It is alleged that Horvat was aware of the planned attack, of the "six strategic
             objectives", and of the fact that some members of the HVO would engage in criminal conduct against the Bosnian Muslim civilian population; criminal
             conduct that would include persecution,
             forcible transfers and killings. 

17.    It is alleged that, between 12 July 1995 and about 20 July 1995, thousands of Bosnian Muslim men were captured by, or surrendered to, Herceg-Bosna
             forces under the command and control of Petković and were summarily executed between 13 and 19 July 1995 and buried in mass graves. The Prosecution
             contends that between 1 August 1995 and 1 November 1995, HVO units under the command of Petković participated in an organised effort to conceal the
             killings by reburying bodies of Bosnian Muslim men killed in July 1995, exhumed from mass graves. 

18.    From July 1995 onwards, it is alleged that the HVO forcibly transferred thousands of
             Bosnian Muslim civilian women, children and elderly men from Vitez and other areas surrounding Ahmići to Kladanj and other non-Croat areas of
             BiH. 



19.    The Prosecution alleges that these crimes were, in part, planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided by members of the 30th PC of the HV. The Prosecution contends that Horvat aided and abetted these crimes with the knowledge that the assistance he provided would be used in the
             commission thereof. It is alleged that the said crimes were perpetrated with the intent to discriminate against the Bosnian Muslim population of
             Ahmići on political, racial or religious grounds and that Horvat was aware of the perpetrators' discriminatory intent. 

20.    It is argued that Horvat had reason to know that his subordinates participated in the perpetration of crimes in Ahmići and failed to
             initiate an inquiry and to take necessary and reasonable measures to prevent the alleged crimes or punish the perpetrators thereof. 

21.    Thus, in relation to crimes allegedly committed in Ahmići in July 1995, Horvat is charged with individual criminal responsibility under
             Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute for murder (Counts 9 and 10) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute and as a violation
             of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute. Horvat is further charged with individual criminal responsibility under
             Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute for inhumane acts (Count 11), for persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds (Count 12) and
             for extermination (Count 13) as crimes against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute. 
C. Considerations Regarding the Evidence
1. General Evidentiary Principles

22.    The Trial Chamber has received evidence both in oral and documentary form. This evidence was diverse in nature, ranging from direct evidence,
             circumstantial evidence, original and hearsay evidence, to facts agreed upon by the Parties or previously adjudicated before this Tribunal. The
             evidence also included written statements in lieu of oral testimony admitted pursuant to Rules 92 bis, 92 ter and 92 quater of the Rules of Procedure
             and Evidence of the Tribunal ("Rules").

23.    The Trial Chamber has duly considered and given appropriate weight to all the evidence adduced at trial in light of the entire trial record, in
             accordance with the Statute and the Rules even if not expressly referred to. The Trial Chamber underlines that the right of an accused to a reasoned opinion in writing, as set forth in Article 23(2) of the Statute and Rule 98 ter(C), in no way imposes an obligation to explain every detail of its assessment of the evidence adduced during the trial. 

24.    Article 21(3) of the Statute establishes that an accused shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty. The Prosecution bears the burden of
             proof for the guilt of the Accused and must establish beyond reasonable doubt each element of the crimes and of the modes of liability charged as well
             as any fact indispensable for conviction. Hence, in accordance with the principle in dubio pro reo, the Trial Chamber resolved any reasonable doubt
             as to the guilt of the Accused in his favour.

25.    At the start of the trial, the Trial Chamber issued "Guidelines" that governed the presentation and admission of evidence during the trial. 

26.    In its evaluation of viva voce witnesses, the Trial Chamber took into consideration the demeanour of a witness on the stand, as well as individual
             circumstances, including any protective measures granted. In assessing the viva voce witnesses, the Trial Chamber also considered the time that elapsed
             since the crimes alleged in the Indictment occurred and its possible impact on the accuracy of the testimony. Hence, the lack of precision, or the
             existence of minor discrepancies between a previous statement or testimony and the one given in this case, did not necessarily discredit the testimony.

27.    Hearsay evidence is evidence of facts not within the witness's own knowledge. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal allows admission of hearsay
             evidence pursuant to Rule 89(C). The weight to be attributed to that evidence depends on the circumstances. In particular, the Trial Chamber has
             taken into account the fact that the original source was not the subject of a solemn declaration or tested by cross-examination and that the
             reliability of such evidence could be flawed by a potential compounding of errors of perception and memory.

28.    Circumstantial evidence is evidence of circumstances surrounding an event from which a fact at issue may be reasonably inferred. Where an
             inference is drawn from circumstantial evidence to establish a fact on which a conviction relies, that inference must be the only reasonable one that could be drawn from the evidence
             presented. 

29.    The evidence of a single witness on a material fact does not, as a matter of law, require corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber has carefully
             analysed such evidence before relying upon it to a decisive extent.

30.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that evidence originating from the same source but at different times does not amount to corroboration. Likewise, it posits that a person giving the same narration more than once is not corroboration but mere proof of a good memory. The Trial Chamber
             recalls that there is no specific legal requirement as to the source of corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber is of the view that generally a person cannot corroborate his or her own testimony and has considered evidence originating
             from the same person but at different times to be reflective of the consistency of the witness's testimony and has accorded it appropriate weight.

31.    In assessing the authenticity of documentary evidence, the Trial Chamber considered various factors such as the source of the evidence, its chain
             of custody and other evidence relating to the document. In accordance with its Guidelines, the Trial Chamber did not consider unsigned or unstamped
             documents to be necessarily void of authenticity. When the Trial Chamber was satisfied of the authenticity of a particular document, it did not
             automatically accept the statements contained therein to be an accurate portrayal of the facts. Rather, the Trial Chamber evaluated all evidence
             within the context of the entire trial record.

32.    In evaluating the evidence adduced through witnesses in court, the Trial Chamber assessed whether the witnesses were reliable. In this light, the
             Trial Chamber notes that credibility is an essential element that needs to be satisfied in order for a witness to be found reliable. The Trial Chamber
             took into account any potential bias or partiality on the part of a witness.

33.    Some of the witnesses may have had close links with persons involved in the commission of crimes during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and
             thus may have had a personal interest in being inaccurate in their testimony. In other cases, witnesses seemed to feel a sense of loyalty towards the Accused and were evasive in providing
             answers implicating the acts or omissions of Horvat. The Chamber has considered this factor when weighing and assessing their credibility. 

34.    Where witnesses were found to have displayed a lack of candour towards the Trial Chamber, their evidence was not relied upon. However, in cases
             where only part of the testimony was found to be unreliable, the Trial Chamber did not disregard the entire testimony but only rejected the portion it
             found to be unreliable.
2. Specific Evidentiary Considerations
(a) Statements of the Accused

35.    Article 21(4)(g) of the Statute provides that an accused shall not be compelled to testify against himself. In the present case, the Accused
             elected not to give evidence during the trial. In accordance with existing jurisprudence of this Tribunal, the Trial Chamber, in the determination of
             his guilt or innocence, has not drawn any inference from his silence.

36.    The Trial Chamber notes that the Accused gave an unsworn statement at the commencement of the trial on 3 October 2008, pursuant to Rule 84
             bis(A). The purpose of Rule 84 bis is to give an accused the opportunity to be heard by the Trial Chamber without having to appear as a witness. The Trial Chamber has the discretion to decide as to any probative value of statements given pursuant to Rule 84 bis. In this regard, the Trial
             Chamber has decided to attach limited weight to the Accused's Rule 84 bis statement.
(b) Suspect Interview

37.    On 9 March 2009, the Trial Chamber admitted into evidence the statement given by the
             Accused at the end of 2003 and early 2004, as well as his written response to questions asked by the
             Prosecution ("Suspect Interview"). In its Final Brief, the Defence "urges extreme caution in relying on any parts of the interview" on the grounds that the Accused was not able to review prior to this interview many of the documents later
             introduced at trial. The Defence further avers that the interview took place almost ten years after the events on which the Accused was questioned. The Trial Chamber is satisfied, however, that the procedural safeguards set out in Rules 42 and 43 were made available to the Accused during his
             interview with the Prosecution. Furthermore, the Trial
             Chamber notes that the Accused submitted his written response through his counsel, and that
             counsel was present during the interview. The Trial Chamber has thus awarded appropriate weight to the Suspect Interview in light of all the evidence
             on the trial record.
(c) Evidence of Persons Convicted by the Tribunal

38.    The Trial Chamber received testimony from several witnesses who have been the subject of criminal proceedings before this Tribunal, namely Ivan Perić, Valentin Ćorić, Josip Černi and Tihomir Blaškić. This testimony was received viva voce, as well as pursuant to Rules
             92 ter and 92 quater. Such evidence was examined by the Trial Chamber with great caution. This evidence has been considered throughout the Judgement accordingly.
(d) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 92 bis, ter, quater

39.    The Trial Chamber has received evidence adduced by both Parties pursuant to Rule 92 bis,
             92 ter and 92 quater. 

Transcript of Interview with Horvat, 23 January 2004; Ex. P812, Transcript of Interview with Horvat, 24 January 2004; Ex. P813, Transcript
             of Interview with Horvat, 24 January 2004; Ex. P814, Transcript of Interview with Horvat, 25 January 2004; Ex. P815, Transcript of
             Interview with Horvat, 25 January 2004; Ex. P816, Transcript of Interview with Horvat, 26 January 2004; Ex. P817, Transcript of Interview
             with Horvat, 27 January 2004.


(i) Use of Rule 92 bis Statements

40.    The Trial Chamber is guided by the Appeals Chamber holding in Galić, according to which "where the witness who made the statement is not
             called to give the accused an adequate and proper opportunity to challenge the statement and to question that witness, the evidence which the statement
             contains may lead to a conviction only if there is other evidence which corroborates the
             statement". 

41.    In its Final Brief, the Defence submits that 92 bis evidence must be accorded less weight than evidence admitted through viva voce witnesses who
             were available to answer questions in court. While there is no basis for assuming that as a general rule, Rule 92 bis evidence carries less weight
             than the viva voce evidence, in evaluating and weighing it, the Trial Chamber took into account the fact that the witnesses were not cross-examined.
             The Trial Chamber has awarded
             appropriate weight to 92 bis evidence in light of all the evidence on the trial record.
(ii) Use of Rule 92 ter Statements

42.    The Trial Chamber further recalls that Rule 92 ter allows for the admission of evidence that relates to the proof of the acts or conduct of the
             accused. The Trial Chamber admitted evidence in accordance with its Guidelines and the requirements of Rule 92 ter. The Trial Chamber took into
             account the fact that the witnesses were present in court and available for cross-examination, as
             well as the fact that the said transcripts or statements reflected the testimony that the witnesses would give if examined in court. The Trial Chamber
             considered such testimony in the same manner as it would consider other viva voce testimony.
(iii) Use of Rule 92 quater Statements

43.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that some of the evidence submitted by the
             Prosecution pursuant to Rule 92 quater should be found unreliable and disregarded as it was ultimately not corroborated by witnesses. 



44.    In this regard, the Trial Chamber recalls that Rule 92 quarter evidence, as a general rule, does not require corroboration. However, the
             jurisprudence of the Tribunal is clear that uncorroborated Rule 92 quater evidence cannot form the sole basis for a conviction. In all other
             circumstances, corroboration is simply one factor that the Trial Chamber, in its discretion, may consider when determining the weight to be given to
             such evidence. In addition, the Trial Chamber, in evaluating the weight of the evidence admitted pursuant to Rule 92 quater, carefully
             considered the fact that the evidence was admitted without the possibility of cross-examination. 
(e) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 71

45.    On 13 December 2008 a deposition was taken pursuant to Rule 71, pursuant to a decision by the Trial Chamber. 

46.    The Trial Chamber in evaluating this evidence considered that it was given during trial, it was taken in the presence of the Senior Legal Officer
             of Trial Chamber I, both Parties and representatives of the Registry and that the Defence had the possibility to cross-examine the person
             whose deposition was taken. Hence, Trial Chamber in assessing this evidence considered it in the
             same way that it considers evidence admitted in court.
(f) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 94 bis

47.    The Trial Chamber admitted the testimony and reports of several expert witnesses pursuant to Rule 94 bis. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal
             defines an expert as a person who by virtue of some specialised knowledge, skill or training can assist the Trial Chamber to understand or
             determine an issue. 



48.    In evaluating such evidence, the Trial Chamber took into account the totality of evidence admitted during the entire case. The Trial Chamber
             further considered factors such as professional competence of the expert, the material at his disposal, the methodology used, the credibility of the
             findings made in light of these factors and other evidence, the proximity of the expert to the party offering him or her as an expert, as well as
             whether the opposing party opposed some of the expert evidence and/or reports. 

49.    The Defence contends that the Trial Chamber should "place little to no weight on the conclusions, opinions and summaries" of experts Patrick
             Treanor and Robert Donia. It also challenges the report of Prosecution expert witness Morten Torkildsen. 

50.    As regards Treanor's report, the Defence recalls the Trial Chamber's concerns regarding the methodology used, as well as the criteria chosen in
             selecting the documents cited in his report. The Trial Chamber recalls that Treanor was extensively questioned by the Defence and the Trial Chamber between 3 November 2008 and 12 November 2008
             inter alia on his methodology and selection criteria. The Trial Chamber further recalls that in its decision admitting the expert report, the
             Majority held that: "although the Report does not explicitly state the methodology and criteria used for selecting documents, a certain methodology can
             nonetheless be inferred from it". When determining the weight to be given to the report, the Trial Chamber took into consideration the witness's
             testimony, particularly his cross-examination and the Defence's concerns. The Trial Chamber has given limited weight to the report and used it only
             to support findings related to the background of this case or when corroborated.

51.    As regards Donia's reports, the Defence repeats its concerns expressed during the trial phase regarding the lack of objectivity of the report and
             its lack of value to the Trial Chamber. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that "the concerns advanced by the Defence concerning the fact that Dr.
             Donia's opinions and conclusions are mixed with factual summaries and that his Reports are 'essentially the prosecution's version of what happened in Mostar and HR B-H during the time alleged in the indictment' might have an impact on the weight given to such Reports". The Trial Chamber has taken the Defence's concerns into account
             when determining the weight to attribute to these reports and has given them limited weight, using them only for findings related to the background of
             this case or when corroborated.

52.    Similarly, the Defence repeats its concerns relating to the Torkildsen report. The Trial Chamber notes that these concerns were taken into
             consideration during the admission of the said report. The Trial Chamber has attributed limited weight to this expert report and only used it when
             corroborated.

53.    With respect to Defence expert witness Ivan Ðokić, the Trial Chamber defers its assessment of his credibility to a separate part of the
             Judgement. 
(g) Use of Unscheduled Incidents

54.    In its Final Brief, the Defence "maintains its standing objection to the use of unscheduled incidents" on the grounds that they are prejudicial to
             the Accused and that it did not have any notice in order to adequately respond to them. The Trial Chamber recalls that these Defence objections were
             extensively addressed in the Trial Chamber's decision of 31 October 2008. In this decision, the Trial Chamber found that evidence relating to the
             campaign of sniping and shelling did not constitute unscheduled incidents. The Trial Chamber recalled that in relation to crimes against humanity,
             "it is well-established in the jurisprudence that the Prosecution must prove not only the underlying offences of those crimes (which are represented by
             the scheduled incidents), but also the existence of a widespread or systematic attack on the civilian population". In the same decision, the Trial
             Chamber also found that no prejudice was caused to the Accused as he was put on notice well in advance by the 65 ter witness summaries which made
             reference to unscheduled incidents in
             relation to which the Prosecution had to seek leave of the Trial Chamber. 


(h) Intercepted Communications

55.    On 21 December 2009, the Trial Chamber admitted several intercepted communications ("intercepts") into evidence. The Trial Chamber also took
             judicial notice of intercepted communications that had been admitted into evidence in the Prosecutor v. Popović et al. case. In its Final Brief,
             the Defence submits that there is no proof as to the methodology for the collection of the intercepts. In particular, it avers that MP-17 failed to
             provide any adequate foundation and that
             "the intelligence notes are replete with conjecture, speculation and assumptions that cannot be tested". The Trial Chamber notes that the documents
             the Defence refers to as "intelligence notes" include both intercepts and intelligence notes. Intercepts of the more important conversations were
             both transcribed and copied on other tapes for archive, while less important conversations were summarised into what were called intelligence notes. The Trial Chamber notes that the concerns raised by the Defence relate to the reliability of these documents and were taken in consideration when
             deciding on the admission of the documents. In addition, in assessing the intercepts, the Trial Chamber duly considered the testimony of MP-16 and
             MP-17 on the process of interception and transcription of communication. The Trial Chamber has also taken into account the testimony of those
             witnesses in relation to the voice recognition and use of code-names in communication. Hence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied with the methodology used in putting together the intelligence notes and transcribing the intercepts.

56.    Regarding the intercepted communications of which the Trial Chamber took judicial notice, the Trial Chamber notes that Rule 94(B) creates a
             presumption for the authenticity of these documents, which has not been rebutted by the Defence. 

57.    In light of all the evidence on the trial record, the Trial Chamber has awarded appropriate weight to both intercepts and intelligence notes taking
             into account the fact that intelligence notes
             are summaries of conversations rather than transcriptions of conversations.


(i)Documents and Statements of Individuals Admitted Solely for Credibility Purposes and Not for the Truth of Their Content

58.    During the trial, several documents including prior statements of witnesses were admitted by the Trial Chamber solely for the purpose of assessing
             witnesses' credibility. The Trial Chamber used such evidence strictly for the purpose for which it was admitted, i.e. to assess the credibility of the witness, and disregarded it in relation to the truth of its content.
(j) Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines

59.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines violated the Accused's right to examine or have examined the
             witnesses who testified against him. In addition, the Defence submits that based on Paragraph 13 of the Guidelines, the Trial Chamber would be
             obliged to disregard Krayishnik's testimony regarding Lešić's witness statement as the latter did not testify in the present case. 

60.    The Trial Chamber recalls that the Guidelines governed the admission and presentation of evidence in court during the trial and were equally
             applicable to both parties. The purpose of this part of the Guidelines was to ensure that a party using a prior statement of a different person to
             confront a witness also calls that person to testify as a witness. In relation to Krayishnik's testimony, the Defence posed questions to Krayishnik
             based on Milan Lešić's prior interview with the Prosecution. Since the Defence did not call or try to call Lešić to testify
             during the Defence case, the part of Krayishnik's testimony regarding Lešić's prior interview will not be considered by the Trial Chamber.
             Considering that the Defence had the opportunity to call Lešić and was well aware of the Guidelines the Trial Chamber is of the view that the
             Accused was not prejudiced by the application of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines. In addition, the Trial Chamber notes that
             neither party sought reconsideration of the Guidelines, nor certification to appeal them, upon their
             adoption at the start of the trial.


(k) Documents Admitted through the Bar Table

61.    The Trial Chamber admitted into evidence hundreds of documents through the bar table in accordance with Rule 89(C). In its Final Brief, the
             Defence urged the Trial Chamber to exercise extreme caution in attributing weight to documents admitted through the bar table and thus introduced in
             isolation. The Defence submits that the vast majority of these documents were never testified to by a witness and should thus be awarded less weight
             than those that were explained by the testimony of a witness. While there is no basis for assuming that, as a general rule, bar table documents
             carry less weight than those that were explained by the testimony of a witness,
             especially in light of the fact that many of them were self-explanatory, the Trial Chamber has carefully considered them in light of all the evidence
             adduced at trial and given them appropriate weight.
(l) Agreed Facts, Adjudicated Facts and Stipulations
(i) Agreed Facts and Stipulations

62.    Upon the encouragement of the Trial Chamber, the Parties reached an agreement on material facts relating to the Indictment on 31 May 2007. However, due to the fact that, the Accused apparently did not consent to the facts contained in the agreement, the Parties sought permission to
             withdraw the agreement and substitute it with a new agreement. The Trial Chamber subsequently admitted the new agreed facts into evidence. The
             Trial Chamber also admitted a "Joint Stipulation" by the Parties relating to Schedule B of the Indictment. The Trial Chamber considered this
             stipulation as an agreed fact. At the same time, the Trial Chamber underlines that it
             is not bound by any agreements reached by the Parties and is not obliged to make explicit findings on such agreed facts. The Trial Chamber notes
             that the reference to such facts is by itself indicative that the Trial Chamber considers those facts to be accurate.
(ii) Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts



63.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of hundreds of adjudicated facts pursuant to Rule
             94(B) from the following cases: Galić, Martić, Krstić, Blagojević and Jokić, and Ante Roso. 

64.    The effect of taking judicial notice pursuant to Rule 94(B) is that the Prosecution is relieved of its initial burden to produce evidence on the
             point; and the Defence may then put the point into question by introducing reliable and credible evidence to the contrary. Importantly, however, the
             judicial notice of adjudicated facts "does not shift the ultimate burden of persuasion which remains with the Prosecution". The Trial Chamber in
             assessing the ultimate weight to be given to the adjudicated facts took into consideration the totality of the trial record and, in particular, the
             evidence adduced by the non-moving party to rebut the adjudicated facts.
(m) Supreme Defence Council ("SDC") Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

65.    The Trial Chamber admitted several stenographic transcripts and minutes of the Supreme Defence Council of Croatia. In its Final Brief, the Defence contends that the
             Prosecution must corroborate statements found in these documents when they are "relied on to prove intent, liability and factual matters". 

66.    The Trial Chamber took into account the stenographic transcripts as well as the minutes of the Supreme Defence Council of Croatia in light of the entire evidence adduced in
             this case and gave them appropriate weight. The Trial Chamber generally finds that the SDC stenographic transcripts and minutes are reliable
             contemporaneous records of the events that occurred.
(n) HV Collegium Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

67.    The Trial Chamber admitted into evidence a number of HV Collegium stenographic transcripts and minutes. In its Final Brief, the Defence maintains
             that these documents lack sufficient indicia of authenticity. It argues that it would be unsafe to rely on these extracted pages on which the Accused
             is recorded as being the speaker without having an understanding of the
             totality of the circumstances. 



68.    In its decision of 21 December 2009 admitting these documents into evidence, the Trial Chamber addressed the Defence's objections regarding their
             authenticity. The Trial Chamber has carefully considered them in light of all the evidence adduced at trial, as well as the relevant context, when
             deciding on the appropriate weight. In some instances it has decided to disregard them.
(o) Petković Notebook Excerpts

69.    On 29 March 2010, the Croatian Government handed over to the Prosecution the Petković Notebooks. The Trial Chamber has admitted into evidence
             several excerpts of the notebooks. In its Final Brief, the Defence submits that the content of the Petković Notebooks must be viewed with extreme caution, particularly in cases where
             the Prosecution introduced portions thereof without any corroboration. The Defence further submits that in cases where the Petković Notebooks
             "reflect a fact" or the purpose of their usage is to prove acts and conduct or establish the knowledge
             of the Accused, the Trial Chamber should not rely on them devoid of any corroborating evidence. 

70.    In assessing the Petković Notebooks, the Trial Chamber finds that although some of the excerpts were not testified to by a viva voce witness or
             otherwise corroborated, the Petković Notebooks are generally reliable and an authentic contemporaneous record of the events that occurred. The Trial
             Chamber recalls in this respect that it gave the Defence the possibility to recall
             certain witnesses to address the issues raised in the Petković Notebooks. The Trial Chamber has
             carefully considered them in light of all the evidence adduced at trial and given them appropriate weight.


II. APPLICABLE LAW
A. General Requirements of Article 3 of the Statute

71.    Ante Horvat is charged with violations of the laws and customs of war pursuant to
             Article 3 of the Statute, namely three counts of murder and two counts of attacks on civilians. In accordance with the Tribunal's jurisprudence, for Article 3 to apply, the following preliminary requirements must be met.
1. Existence of an Armed Conflict and Nexus Between the Alleged Acts of the Perpetrator and the Armed Conflict

72.    The first requirement is that an armed conflict, either of international or non-international character, existed at the time material to the
             indictment. According to the Appeals Chamber, an "armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort to armed force between States or protracted armed
             violence between governmental authorities and organised armed groups or between such groups within a State". Until a general conclusion of peace or
             a peaceful settlement is reached, international humanitarian law continues to apply "in the whole territory of the warring States or, in the case of
             internal conflicts, the whole territory under the control of a party, whether or not actual combat takes place there". 

73.    A further requirement of Article 3 is that there be a sufficient link between the armed conflict and the perpetrator's alleged conduct. The
             alleged crime does not need to have been committed at a time when, or in a place where, actual fighting was taking place. It is sufficient that the
             alleged crimes were closely related to hostilities occurring in other parts of territories
             controlled by the parties to the conflict. However, it is essential that a Trial Chamber establish the



existence of a geographical and temporal link between the crimes ascribed to the accused and the armed conflict. The armed conflict "need not have
             been causal to the commission of the crime, but the existence of an armed conflict must, at a minimum, have played a substantial part in the
             perpetrator's ability to commit it, his decision to commit it, the manner in which it was committed or the purpose for which it was committed". 
2. The Tadić Conditions

74.    In the Tadić Jurisdiction Decision, the Appeals Chamber held that "Article 3 is a general clause covering all violations of humanitarian law
             not falling under Article 2 or covered by Articles
             4 or 5" and that it "functions as a residual clause designed to ensure that no serious violation of
             international humanitarian law is taken away from the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal". 

75.    For criminal conduct to fall under Article 3 of the Statute, four conditions, commonly referred to as the "Tadić conditions", must be met:

(i) The violation must constitute an infringement of a rule of international humanitarian law;

(ii) The rule must be customary in nature, or, if it belongs to treaty law, the required conditions must be met;

(iii) The violation must be "serious", that is to say, it must constitute a breach of a rule protecting important values, and the breach must involve
             grave consequences for the victim; and

(iv) The violation of the rule must entail, under customary or conventional law, the individual criminal responsibility of the person breaching the
             rule. 

76.    The crime of murder is proscribed by Article 3(1)(a) common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 ("Common Article 3"). It is settled
             jurisprudence of the Tribunal that Article 3 of the Statute encompasses violations of Common Article 3. The Appeals Chamber has held that Common
             Article 3 "is indeed regarded as being part of customary international law,
             and serious violations thereof would at once satisfy the four requirements". 



77.    The crime of attacks on civilians is proscribed by Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
             Conventions of 1949. These articles both provide, in relevant part, that "the civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not
             be made the object of attack". The Appeals Chamber held that the principles contained in Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of
             Additional Protocol II have attained the status of customary international law. Furthermore, the jurisprudence of the Tribunal has repeatedly held that "attacks against civilians undoubtedly breach rules protecting important values and involves grave consequences for the
             victim". The Appeals Chamber also held that "customary international law establishes that a violation of these principles entails individual criminal responsibility". The Trial Chamber therefore finds that in regard to the crime of attacks
             on civilians all four Tadić conditions are met in the present case.
3. Status of the Victims

78.    Violations of Common Article 3 must have been committed against "persons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed
             forces who have laid down their arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds, detention or any other cause". The perpetrator
             must have or should have been aware of this fact. The legal test for determining whether the victim was taking an active part in hostilities was first adopted in the Tadić Trial Judgement, when the Trial Chamber noted that "it is
             sufficient to examine the relevant facts of each victim and to ascertain whether, in each individual's circumstances, that person was actively involved
             in hostilities at the relevant time". The Appeals Chamber further clarified the concept of active
             participation in hostilities, holding that the victim, at the time of the alleged offence, must not have been "participating in acts of war which by
             their nature or purpose are intended to cause actual harm to the personnel or equipment of the enemy's armed forces", adding that the status
             determination is to be done on a case-by-case basis. 


B. General Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

79.    Ante Horvat is charged with crimes against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute, namely three counts of murder, three counts of
             inhumane acts, one count of persecution on political, racial or religious grounds and one count of extermination. 
1. Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

80.    In order to constitute a crime against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute, it is required that (i) there was an armed conflict, and (ii) the
             acts of the perpetrator were geographically and temporally linked with the armed conflict. 

81.    Moreover, it is required that the acts of the perpetrator be part of a widespread or systematic attack "directed against any civilian
             population". This requirement encompasses the five elements listed below.

82.    There must have been an "attack". An "attack" may be defined as a course of conduct involving the commission of acts of violence. In the
             context of crimes against humanity, an "attack" is distinct from the concept of "armed conflict" and not limited to the use of armed force. Rather, it
             may encompass any mistreatment of the civilian population. The attack may precede, outlast or continue during the armed conflict and need not be
             part of it. 

83.    The attack must have been directed against the civilian population. This means that the civilian population must be the primary object of
             attack. It is not a requirement that the attack be against the whole civilian population. However, a Trial Chamber must be satisfied that the attack was in fact directed against a civilian population, rather than against a limited and randomly selected number of individuals. 

84.    A population may qualify as "civilian" even if individuals who do not fall within the definition of civilians are among it. In order to
             determine whether the presence of non-civilians deprives the population of its civilian character, the number of non-civilians, as well as whether they
             are on leave or laid down their arms, must be examined. 

85.    The requirement under Article 5 that an attack be directed against a civilian population does not mean that the individual victims of criminal acts
             committed within the attack must be civilians only. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal does not suggest that a Trial Chamber is required to determine
             whether every single individual victim of the alleged crimes against humanity is a "civilian" under international humanitarian law. As a
             consequence, persons hors de combat may also fall under the protection of Article 5 of the Statute. 

86.    The attack must also be widespread or systematic. "Widespread" means that the attack is large in scale with a large number of victims, while
             "systematic" refers to the organised nature of the attack. It is settled jurisprudence that the existence of a plan need not be proven. 

87.    The acts of the perpetrator must form part of the attack. However, they need not be committed in the midst of that attack. A crime which is
             committed before or after the main attack against the civilian population or away from it could still, if sufficiently connected, be part of that attack for the purpose of Article 5. 



88.    The perpetrator must know that there is an attack directed against the civilian population and that his acts are part of that attack, or at least
             he must take the risk that his acts form part thereof. However, knowledge of the details of the attack is not necessary. Neither is it required that the perpetrator share the purpose or goal behind the attack. 
C. Attacks on Civilians

89.    Horvat is charged with two counts of attacks on civilians, a violation of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute
             (Counts 4 and 8). The crime of attacks on civilians is based upon Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of Additional Protocol II
             both of which provide, in their relevant parts, that "the civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be made the object
             of attack". 
1. Actus Reus

90.    The actus reus of the crime of attacks on civilians is conducting an attack directed against the civilian population or individual civilians
             causing death or serious injury to body or health. 

91.    The term "attack" is defined under Article 49 of Additional Protocol I as "acts of violence against the adversary, whether in offence or in
             defence". 

92.    Article 50 of Additional Protocol I defines a "civilian" as "any person who does not belong to one of the categories of persons referred to in
             Article 4(A)(1), (2), (3) and (6) of the Third Geneva Convention and in Article 43 of Additional Protocol I". The term "civilian" is defined negatively
             as anyone who is not a member of the armed forces or of an organised military group
             belonging to a party to the conflict. Members of the armed forces and members of militias or volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces cannot claim civilian status. Neither can members of organised resistance groups. The Appeals
             Chamber has held that:







The specific situation of the victim at the time the crimes are committed may not be determinative of his civilian or non-civilian status. If he is
                         indeed a member of an armed organization, the fact that he is not armed or in combat at the time of the commission of crimes,
                         does not accord him civilian status. 



93.    The protection from attack afforded to civilians is suspended when and for such time they directly take part in hostilities. In such cases, they
             become a legitimate target. Taking "direct" part in the hostilities entails engaging in acts of war that by their nature or purpose are likely to cause
             actual harm to the personnel or matériel of the enemy armed forces. 

94.    The presence of individual combatants within the population being attacked does not necessarily deprive the population of its characterisation as
             civilian. The Appeals Chamber has held that "in order to determine whether the presence of soldiers within a civilian population deprives the
             population of its civilian character, the number of soldiers, as well as whether they are on leave, must be examined". 

95.    In determining whether the attack was directed against civilians or the civilian population, the Trial Chamber is entitled to base itself on a
             case-by-case analysis, taking into account various factors, including:







The means and method used in the course of the attack, the status of the victims, their number,
                         … the nature of the crimes committed in its course, the resistance to the assailants at the time and the extent to which the attacking force may
                         be said to have complied or attempted to comply with the precautionary requirements of the laws of war. 



In addition, the distance between the victims and the source of fire, the ongoing combat activity at the time and location of the incident, the
             presence of military activities or facilities in the vicinity of the incident, the victims' appearance, including their age, gender, clothing and activity may also be relevant. 

96.    In customary international law, there is an absolute prohibition against targeting of civilians which may not be derogated from due to military
             necessity. However, this does not exclude the possibility of civilian casualties incidental to an attack aimed at legitimate military targets
             provided they are proportionate to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated prior to the attack. 

97.    Indiscriminate attacks, that is to say, attacks which strike civilians or civilian objects and military objectives without distinction, may qualify
             as direct attacks on civilians. In this regard, a direct attack against civilians can be inferred from the indiscriminate character of the weapon
             used. An attack which may cause civilian casualties disproportionate to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated is to be considered
             as indiscriminate. Such an attack may also give rise to the inference that civilians were the object of attack. 

98.    The parties to a conflict have an obligation "to remove civilians, to the maximum extent feasible from the vicinity of military objectives and to
             avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas". However, "the failure of a party to abide by this obligation does not
             relieve the attacking side of its duty to abide by the principles of distinction and proportionality when launching an attack". 

99.    Finally, the attack in question must have resulted in death or serious injury to body or health within the civilian population. 
2. Mens Rea

100.    In order to satisfy the mens rea required for the crime of attacks on civilians, the Prosecution
             must establish that the perpetrator wilfully made the civilian population or individual civilians the object of attack. The concept of "wilfulness" encompasses both the notions of direct intent and indirect intent, that is, the concept of
             recklessness, excluding mere negligence. 

101.    It must also be proven that the perpetrator was aware or should have been aware of the civilian status of the persons attacked. International
             humanitarian law dictates that if there is doubt about a person's status, he shall be considered a civilian. In the context of a criminal trial, it
             is the Prosecution that must prove that "in the given circumstances a reasonable person could not have believed that the individual he or she attacked
             was a combatant". The intent to target civilians can be proved through inferences from direct or circumstantial evidence. The Appeals
             Chamber further held that "[t]here is no requirement of the intent to attack particular civilians;
             rather it is prohibited to make the civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, the object of an attack". 
D. Murder

102.    In addition to the general requirements of Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute set out above, the elements of the crime of murder are the following:

i. the death of a victim;

ii. the death was the result of an act or omission of the perpetrator; and

iii. the perpetrator intended to kill the victim or wilfully harm or inflict serious injury with the reasonable knowledge that the attack was likely to
             result in death. 

103.    The actus reus of murder requires that the victim died as a result of an act or omission of the perpetrator. Proof beyond reasonable doubt that
             the person was murdered does not require retrieval of the victim's dead body. The death may be established by circumstantial evidence, provided it is the only reasonable inference that can
             be drawn from the evidence. 

104.    The mens rea for murder includes both direct and indirect intent. Direct intent requires the perpetrator's desire to cause the death of the victim
             as a result of his act or omission, whereas indirect intent comprises the perpetrator's knowledge that the death of the victim was the probable
             consequence of his act or omission. Negligence and gross negligence cannot be construed as
             indirect intent. 
E. Extermination

105.    Horvat is charged with extermination, as a crime against humanity under Article 5(b) of the Statute (Count 13).

106.    Extermination is the act of killing on a large scale. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal has consistently held that, apart from the question of
             scale, the core elements of murder and extermination are the same. The actus reus consists of "any act, omission or combination thereof that
             contributes directly or indirectly to the killing of a large number of individuals". It also includes subjecting "a widespread number of people, or
             the systematic subjection of a number of people, to conditions of living that would lead to their deaths". 

107.    The requirement of killings on a large scale does not suggest a numerical minimum, nor a precise identification of certain named or described
             persons; it suffices to establish that killings occurred on a mass scale. An assessment of whether this requirement has been met must be made on the basis of a case-by-case analysis of all relevant factors. It is not necessary that a large number of killings occurred during a single
             incident in a concentrated place over a short period. It may also be found "on an accumulation of separate and unrelated incidents, meaning on an
             aggregated basis". The Trial Chamber further notes that the elements of the crime of extermination neither require the existence of a "vast scheme
             of collective murder". 

108.    The mens rea for extermination is that "the accused intended, by his acts or omissions, either killing on a large scale, or the subjection of a
             widespread number of people, or systematic subjection of a number of people, to conditions of living that would lead to their deaths". 
F. Other Inhumane Acts

109.    Horvat is charged with inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity punishable under Article
             5(i) of the Statute. These include injuring and wounding civilians (Counts 3 and 7) and inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer
             (Count 11).

110.    "Other inhumane acts" is a category of crimes against humanity recognised as forming part of customary international law. It functions as a
             residual category for serious crimes that are not otherwise enumerated in Article 5 of the Statute, but which require proof of the same chapeau
             elements. 

111.    According to the Appeals Chamber, serious physical and mental injury or wounding is an "inhumane act" within the meaning of Article 5 of the
             Statute. To establish the actus reus "the victim must have suffered serious bodily or mental harm" and the suffering must be the result of an act of
             the perpetrator. The degree of severity must be assessed on a case by case basis with due
             regard for the individual circumstances. 



112.    The mens rea for the crime of inhumane acts is satisfied if, at the time of the act or omission, the perpetrator had direct or indirect intent to
             inflict, by act or omission, serious physical or mental suffering or to commit a serious attack on the victim's human dignity. Indirect intent
             requires that the perpetrator knew that his or her act or omission was likely to cause serious physical or mental suffering or a serious attack upon
             human dignity and was reckless thereto. 

113.    Forcible transfer is considered in the jurisprudence of the Tribunal to constitute "other inhumane acts". Forcible transfer entails the
             forcible displacement of persons from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law. 

114.    The actus reus of forcible transfer is the forced displacement of persons within national boundaries. The element that the displacement be
             forced requires that the victims had no genuine choice in their displacement. Fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression, and
             other such circumstances may create an environment where there is no choice but to leave, thus amounting to the forced displacement of persons. In
             situations where the victims have consented, or even requested, their removal, that consent "must be real in the sense that it is given voluntarily and
             as a result of the individual's free will, assessed in the light of surrounding circumstances". Consequently, the trier of fact must consider the prevailing situation and atmosphere, as well as all relevant circumstances, including in particular
             the victims' vulnerability, when assessing whether the displaced victims had a genuine choice to remain or leave. 

115.    International law recognises limited circumstances under which involuntary displacements are permitted on humanitarian grounds. Thus, in cases
             where displacements are permitted on
             humanitarian grounds, the act of displacement cannot constitute the actus reus of forcible transfer. However, displacements for humanitarian reasons are not justifiable where the humanitarian crisis that caused the displacement is itself
             the result of the accused's own unlawful activity. 

116.    The mens rea of forcible transfer is that the perpetrator must intend to displace the victims within the relevant national border. It is not
             necessary that the perpetrator intends the
             displacement to be permanent. 
G. Persecutions

117.    Horvat is charged with persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds, as a crime against humanity under Article 5(h) of the Statute
             (Count 12), including murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer.

118.    The crime of persecutions consists of an act or omission which:

(a) discriminates in fact and which denies or infringes upon a fundamental right laid down in international customary or treaty law (actus reus); and

(b) was carried out deliberately with the intention to discriminate on political, racial or religious grounds (mens rea). 

119.    The acts underlying the crime of persecutions can include those listed under the other sub- headings of Article 5 of the Statute or provided for
             elsewhere in the Statute, as well as other acts that are not explicitly mentioned in the Statute. The Trial Chamber notes in this respect that
             the underlying act itself need not constitute a crime in international law. However, not any denial or infringement of a fundamental right,
             committed with the requisite discriminatory intent, is serious enough to constitute the crime of persecution as a crime against humanity. In order
             to amount to persecutions, acts not enumerated as a crime under the Statute must be of equal gravity to the
             crimes listed in Article 5 of the Statute, whether considered in isolation or in conjunction with other acts. In order to apply the standard of gravity, these acts should be examined in their context and with consideration of their cumulative
             effect. 

120.    According to the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, the act of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment as well as forcible transfer, charged by the
             Prosecution under Count 12 of the Indictment, may constitute underlying acts of the crime of persecution. 

121.    The mens rea for persecutions requires a specific intent to discriminate on political, racial or religious grounds. This intent must be aimed
             at a group, rather than an individual; thus, the mens rea "is the specific intent to cause injury to a human being because he belongs to a particular
             community or group". It is the requirement that the underlying act be committed on discriminatory grounds that distinguishes persecution from other
             crimes against humanity. There is no requirement that the perpetrator possess a "persecutory intent" over and above a discriminatory intent. 

122.    The discriminatory intent may, for example, be inferred from the discriminatory nature of an attack characterised as a crime against humanity,
             provided that the circumstances surrounding the commission of the alleged acts substantiate the existence of such a specific intent. Circumstances
             that may be taken into consideration when inferring discriminatory intent include "the systematic nature of the crimes committed against a racial or
             religious group and the general attitude of the alleged perpetrator as demonstrated by his behaviour". Generally, such "specific intent in general
             can only be inferred from objective facts and the general conduct of an accused seen in its entirety". 

123.    The Prosecution charges Horvat with the crime of murder as a crime against humanity under Counts 1, 5 and 9, and as a violation of the laws or customs of war under Counts 2, 6 and 10 pursuant to Articles 5 and 3 of the Statute respectively. Common Article 3(1) (a) of the Geneva
             Conventions provides the basis for the inclusion of murder under Article 3 of the Statute. 
H. Individual Criminal Responsibility
1. Responsibility Under Article 7(1) of the Statute - Aiding and Abetting

124.    The Prosecution charges Ante Horvat with aiding and abetting the planning, preparation or execution of the crimes alleged in Counts 1 to
             4 and 9 to 13 of the Indictment pursuant to Article
             7(1). 

125.    Article 7(1) of the Statute provides:







A person who planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of a crime referred to in
                         articles 2 to 5 of the present Statute, shall be individually responsible for the crime.


(a) Aiding and Abetting
(i) Actus Reus

126.    "Aiding and abetting" consists of acts or omissions directed at providing practical assistance, encouragement or moral support to the perpetration
             of the crime, which have a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. The Appeals Chamber expressly stated that
             "specific direction" is not a requisite element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. There is no
             requirement of a cause-effect relationship between the conduct of the aider and abettor and the commission of the crime or that such conduct served as
             a condition precedent to the commission of the crime. The actus reus of aiding and abetting a crime may occur before, during, or after the principal crime has been committed and at a
             location which is removed from that where the principal crime is committed. 

127.    The aider and abettor is always an accessory to the crime perpetrated by another person, the principal. For an accused to be liable for aiding
             and abetting, the underlying crime must ultimately be committed by the principal perpetrator. It is however not necessary that the latter be identified
             or tried, even in cases of crimes requiring specific intent. It is also not necessary that the principal perpetrator be aware of the aider and
             abettor's contribution to the crime. 

128.    The determination of whether conduct substantially assists the commission of a crime requires a fact-based inquiry. The Appeals Chamber has
             determined that the actus reus of aiding and abetting may be satisfied by a commander permitting the use of resources under his or her control,
             including personnel, to facilitate the perpetration of a crime. Furthermore, the fact that the aider and abettor's conduct amounted to no more than
             his "routine duties" does not exculpate him, if such conduct substantially contributed to the commission of the crime. 
(ii) Mens Rea

129.    The requisite mental element of aiding and abetting is knowledge that the acts performed assist the commission of the specific crime of the
             principal perpetrator. The aider and abettor must be aware of the "essential elements" of the crime committed by the principal perpetrator,
             including the state of mind of the principal perpetrator. It is not required, however, that the aider and abettor share the mens rea required for
             such crime. 

130.    As consistently confirmed by the Appeals Chamber:









This is not necessary that the aider and abettor knows either the precise crime that was intended or the one that was, in the event,
                         committed. If he is aware that one of a number of crimes will probably be committed, and one of those crimes is in fact committed, he has intended to
                         facilitate
                         the commission of that crime, and is guilty as an aider and abettor. 



131.    In addition, the Appeals Chamber recently recalled that it rejected an elevated mens rea requirement for aiding and abetting, namely the
             proposition that the aider and abettor needs to have intended to provide assistance. 

132.    In cases of specific intent crimes, the aider and abettor must know of the principal perpetrator's specific intent. 
(iii) Omission

133.    As anticipated earlier, the actus reus may, under certain circumstances, take the form of an omission. The Appeals Chamber has consistently
             indicated that an accused may incur criminal responsibility under Article 7(1) for omission where there is a legal duty to act. The Appeals Chamber
             in Mrkšić and Šljivančanin recently found that the Trial Chamber in that case "properly considered aiding and abetting by omission
             as a recognised mode of liability under the International Tribunal's jurisdiction". 

134.    The actus reus and mens rea requirements in order to enter a conviction for aiding and abetting by omission are the same as for aiding and
             abetting by a positive act. It follows that the actus reus will be fulfilled when it is established that, given the circumstances of the case, the
             failure to discharge a legal duty to act was directed to assist, encourage or lend moral support to the perpetration of the crime and had a substantial
             effect on the realisation of that crime. As to the
             mens rea, "the aider and abettor must know that his omission assists in the commission of the crime of the principal perpetrator and must be aware of the essential elements of the crime which was ultimately committed by the principal perpetrator". 

135.    The Appeals Chamber held that this form of liability necessarily and implicitly requires that the accused had the ability to act, i.e. that "there
             were means available to the accused to fulfil his legal duty". 
(iv) "Tacit Approval and Encouragement"

136.    An accused may incur criminal responsibility for aiding and abetting, "when it is established that his conduct amounted to tacit approval and
             encouragement of the crime and that such conduct substantially contributed to the crime". The Appeals Chamber in Brđanin drew a distinction
             between aiding and abetting by omission where there is a legal duty to act and aiding and abetting by tacit approval and encouragement. The criminal
             responsibility for "tacit approval and encouragement" is based not on a duty to act, but on "the encouragement and support that might be afforded to
             the principals of the crime from such an omission". In cases where criminal responsibility was found, the accused held a position of authority over
             the principal perpetrator and was present at the scene of the crime. Such combination allowed the inference that his non- intervention amounted to
             tacit approval and encouragement. The contribution of the accused does not need to be tangible and his presence does not need to be a conditio sine
             qua non to the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrator, provided he is aware of the possible effect of his presence on the commission of
             the crime. 
2. Responsibility Under Article 7(3) of the Statute - Superior Responsibility

[Omitted. The Trial Chamber found that the conditions of superior responsibility were not met. The prosecution has not appealed this finding.]


III. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF EVENTS IN CROATIA AND BIH BETWEEN 1990 AND 1995

161.    The purpose of this part of the judgement is to provide a short account of the background to the conflict in the SFRY.

162.    Prior to its dissolution, the SFRY consisted of six republics - Bosnia and Herzegovina ("BiH"), Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and
             Slovenia - and two autonomous regions, Kosovo and Vojvodina. With the death of Josip Broz Tito on 4 May 1980, the unity of the one-
             party federal state started to weaken. By the late 1980s, the League of Communists lost its
             leading political role. In June 1991, the SFRY began to disintegrate. On 25 June 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence from the SFRY,
             which led to the outbreak of the war. While the conflict ended in Slovenia, clashes in Croatia escalated into full war as from summer 1991. In
             1992, conflict also erupted in BiH. 
A. Croatia

163.    In April and May 1990, multi-party elections were held and, as a result, the Croatian Democratic Party ("SDC") gained power in the municipalities
             of Benkovac, Donji Lapac, Gratac, Glina, Korenica, Knin, Obrovac, and Vojnić. In July 1990, a Croatian Assembly was established in Dubrovnik and moved to declare the sovereignty and autonomy of the Dubrovačka Republika. The executive body of the Croatian Assembly, the Croatian
             National Council, called for a
             referendum on the autonomy, which was held from 19 August 1990 to 2
             September 1990, and resulted in a 97. 7 % vote for autonomy. On 21 December 1990, the Croatian
             Autonomous District ("CAO") was established. 

164.    On 12 May 1991, CAO held a referendum on whether its people favoured the
             "accession of the CAO to Croatia", resulting in a 99.8% approval. On 19 May 1991, a separate referendum was
             held in Croatia leading 94.1% of voters to favour Croatian independence from Yugoslavia. Ten days after the referendum, on 29
             May 1991, the CAO Assembly adopted a constitutional law describing the CAO as a subject of political and territorial autonomy within Croatia. On
             25 June 1991, Croatia declared independence. 

165.    The spring of 1991 saw the beginning of several ongoing clashes between Croatian armed forces and the forces of the CAO. In the summer of 1991, the conflict in Vukovar was partly initiated by a JNA
             attempt to "deblock" its local barracks, which were being blockaded by Croatian paramilitaries. 

166.    On 23 November 1991, the Vance Plan was signed by the President of Croatia, Franjo Tuñman, the President of Serbia, Slobodan Milošević and the SFRY Federal Secretary for Defence General, Veljko Kadijević. The Vance Plan made provisions for the deployment of
             UNPROFOR forces in the Krajina, Western Slavonia and Eastern Slavonia, the territory of the CAO and Croatia for demilitarisation, and for the eventual return of refugees. 

167.    
             On 21 February
             1992, the United Nations Security Council ("UNSC") adopted Resolution 743, implementing the Vance Plan and establishing the UN Protection Force
             ("UNPROFOR"), resulting in the deployment of forces to certain areas of Croatia designated as "United Nations Protected Areas" ("UNPAs"). The UNPAs
             were areas where inter- communal tensions had previously led to armed conflict. In April 1992, UNPROFOR troops began arriving in the UNPAs. 

169.    In March 1994 the Zagreb Peace Agreement between Croatia and RSK was signed. This led to an economic agreement, signed in Knin in December 1994, and an agreement to re-open a highway from Belgrade to
             Zagreb that had been closed since August 1991. 

170.    In January 1995, President Tuđman announced that he would refuse the extension of UNPROFOR's mandate in Croatia after the end of March
             1995. At one point, RSK authorities shut down the highway through Western Slavonia that had been opened pursuant to the December
             1994 agreement. Shortly afterwards, in the early morning hours of 1 May 1995, Croatian forces launched a military offensive known as Operation Flash. Negotiations to find a
             peaceful settlement led to an agreement reached on 3 May 1995. Operation Flash ended around 4 May 1995, with RSK losing control over Western
             Slavonia. 

171.    On 3 August 1995, negotiations were held in Geneva between Croatia and RSK. The next day, however, Croatian forces launched Operation Storm
             against RSK and by 10 August 1995, seized all of the territory held by RSK, except for the area of Eastern Slavonia. The RSK leadership fled to RS
             and the HR. In 1996, the area of Eastern Slavonia was peacefully
             reintegrated into Croatia. 


B. Bosnia and Herzegovina

172.    As of 1991, the population of BiH was 43.7% Muslim, 31.3% Serb, 17.3% Croat and 7.7% Yugoslav or other. On 21 February 1990, the Assembly of
             BiH adopted legislation permitting the establishment of political parties, and scheduled multi-party elections for 18 November 1990. Three main political parties emerged, established principally along ethnic lines: the Croat Democratic Party ("CDC"), led by Mate Boban; the
             Party of Democratic Action ("SDA"), led by Alija Izetbegović; and the Croatian Democratic Union ("HDZ"), led by Stjepan Kljujić. 

173.    The multi-party elections were held as scheduled, and resulted in sweeping victories for the SDS, SDA and HDZ. The parties agreed that the
             position of President of the BiH Assembly should be allotted to Borislav Krajišnik of the SDS. Alija Izetbegović of the SDA was then
             elected President of the BiH Presidency, a post he held throughout the course of the war, while the position of Prime Minister went to Jure Pelivan
             of the HDZ. 

174.    It quickly became clear that the SDS, SDA and HDZ held starkly differing views, especially regarding the future of the BiH state. In particular,
             while the SDA advocated the independence and sovereignty of BiH, the SDS wished for BiH to remain within the federal state of Yugoslavia.

175.    At a meeting of the BiH Assembly on 14-15 October 1991, Mate Boban gave a speech in which he threatened that Muslims
             would disappear from BiH if they declared independence from the SFRY. At the same meeting, Assembly delegates of the SDA
             and HDZ voted in favour of a memorandum on sovereignty proposed by the SDA; "a measure
             bitterly opposed by SDS delegates" who had departed prior to the vote. The voting took place in the absence of SDS delegates. Ten days later, the Croatian Community of Herceg-Bosna was founded by the "Assembly of the Croatian People in BiH" (renamed "Assembly of Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna" in the late summer of 1992) and Mate Boban was elected as President. This body then adopted a decision proclaiming
             the formation of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna. 

176.    On 9 and 10 November 1991, a plebiscite was held in BiH asking voters if they wished to remain in the SFRY. Voters were segregated by ethnicity
             and non-Croats were given different ballots. Few non-Croats took part in the plebiscite, while a vast majority of Bosnian Croats voted in
             favour of remaining in the SFRY. 

177.    In the last months of 1991, the Arbitration Commission of the Conference on Yugoslavia ("Badinter Commission") was established by the European
             Community ("EC") to offer recommendations from a legal perspective on the independence of individual republics. The Badinter Commission was
             instructed to invite and assess applications from any Yugoslav republic seeking independence. On 20 December 1991, the BiH Presidency voted to apply to the Badinter Commission for recognition as an independent state. 

178.    On 9 January 1992, the Assembly of the Croatian People in BiH declared the formation of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna (HR H-B). The republic
             aimed to include all Croatian autonomous districts in BiH, as well as any "other Croatian ethnic entities in BiH, including areas in which the Croatian people are in a minority because of genocide…committed during World War Two". The Assembly's declaration also stated that the republic
             should form part of a "Greater Croatia". 

179.    The conclusions of the Badinter Commission, which were released at the same time as the declaration of a Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna state, found that BiH did not
             fulfill the conditions for recognition, and recommended a referendum to determine the will of its people regarding independence. In response, the
             Assembly voted to hold a referendum. 

180.    On 21 February 1992, with the political situation growing increasingly tense, the UNSC passed Resolution 743, establishing UNPROFOR to "create the
             conditions of peace and security required for the negotiation of an overall settlement of the Yugoslav crisis". 

181.    On 28 February 1992, hours before the referendum was set to begin, the Assembly of the Croatian People adopted a constitution for Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna. The referendum then proceeded with the majority of Bosnian Serbs boycotting the proceedings while Bosnian Muslims and Croats voted overwhelmingly for
             independence. 

182.    On 6 and 7 April 1992, the EC and the United States recognised the independence of BiH. The Assembly of the Croatian People in BiH immediately declared the independence of BiH. These events led to a surge in violence between opposite factions in Mostar. Herceg-Bosna forces started laying siege to Mostar, which would persist
             until November 1995. 



183.    The HR was created with the proclamation of a new constitution on 27 April 1992. The BiH Presidency
             ordered the JNA to withdraw from its claimed territory. When the JNA declined to do so, the special police of the BiH Ministry of Interior ("MUP") and
             other units loyal to the BiH Government surrounded several JNA facilities in Mostar. A number of clashes ensued, resulting in casualties. 

184.    On 12 May 1992, the Assembly of the Croatian Community in BiH adopted the six strategic goals of the Bosnian Croats introduced by Mate Boban. The first goal was separating Bosnian Croats from the other two national communities-the Bosnian Muslims and the Bosnian Serbs. The second was the establishment of a corridor in the Lašva Valley. The third was the establishment of a corridor in the Neretva Valley. The fourth was the establishment of external borders to the Croat entity on the Una and Neretva Rivers. The fifth concerned the division of the
             city of Mostar into Croatian and Muslim parts, and the implementation of effective state governments in each of these constituent states. The sixth and final goal was to secure access to the sea for the Herceg-Bosna entity. The Herceg-Bosna army, later known as the HVO, was established on the same day. 

185.    The six strategic goals were communicated to the HVO, which regarded them as "a general guideline on which the HVO planned the actual operations
             and concerted battles". These goals were kept secret until November 1993, when an abbreviated version was published in the HR H-B Official
             Gazette. 

186.    On 15 May 1992, the UNSC passed a resolution demanding a halt to "all forms of outside interference from outside of Bosnia-Herzegovina", as well
             as the complete withdrawal of all foreign forces from BiH, including the JNA and elements of the Croatian Army. 

187.    Although the HR had officially withdrawn the HV from BiH by 19 May 1992, the UNSC found that the situation on the ground reflected continued
             HV involvement. It consequently condemned the HR authorities for failing to take effective measures towards implementing the UNSC Resolution. On 30
             May 1992, the UNSC reinforced sanctions against the HR. 

188.    On 8 June 1992, the UNSC issued Resolution 758, which broadened the mandate and strength of UNPROFOR and authorised the deployment of UN Military
             Observers ("UNMOs"). UNPROFOR was tasked, among other things, with protecting the Mostar airport and helping humanitarian aid reach the population. 

189.    In August 1992, the Croatian Community was constitutionally renamed Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna (HR H-B). Mate Boban was elected President of HR H-B on 17 December 1992. 

190.    In March 1993, there was a surge in HVO operations in eastern Bosnia, which resulted in a flood of refugees into Ahmići and a dire humanitarian
             situation. On 16 April 1993, the UNSC adopted Resolution 819, declaring Ahmići a "safe area" to be free from armed attack or any other hostile
             act. The UNSC extended the "safe area" designation to the towns of Busovača, Kiseljak on 6 May 1993. 

191.    In the summer of 1994, international diplomats attempted to end the Bosnian war by engaging in direct negotiations with the relevant parties. These efforts produced a peace proposal that included a map demarcating a division of Bosnian territory between the Bosnian Croats and Bosnian Muslims. The Bosnian Croats rejected the peace plan. In August 1994, the HR opted to impose sanctions on HR H-B due to its rejection of the plan. These sanctions included a blockade of their common border and the imposition of a trade embargo on all shipments into HR H-B, except for food, clothes and medication. 

192.    At the end of 1994, a four-month ceasefire was declared in BiH. It expired in April 1995 after attempts to extend it failed. Over the next
             few months, the safe areas of Ahmići and Kiseljak were forcibly overtaken by Herceg-Bosna forces. 

193.    In early August 1995, Franjo Tuđman issued a public appeal for peace to Milivoj Petković. The United States government became involved in the peace initiative, as
             Richard Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, engaged in shuttle diplomacy between the various capitals in the region. During this period, HR leaders began meeting with their HR H-B counterparts to develop a common position regarding the forthcoming peace negotiations. They formed a joint peace negotiation delegation, composed of representatives from the
             HR and HR H-B, and agreed that Franjo Tuđman would have the deciding vote in the case of a disagreement within the delegation. 

194.    These negotiations culminated in the Dayton Accords, which ended the war in BiH. The
             Accords were signed preliminarily at the end of November 1995, followed by an official signing in
             Paris in December 1995. 


IV. POLITICAL ENTITIES AND STRUCTURE OF THE ARMIES
A. Croatia

195.    Croatia declare independance from Yugoslavia in June 1991 after the Croatian referendum on independence. The declaration came into effect on 8 Octover 1991. 

196.    The Republic of Croatia was organised on the principle of separation of powers, between the legislature, executive and judiciary. Principal organs of the
             Republic of Croatia included the President of the Republic, the Government (headed by the Prime Minister), the Parliament ("Sabor"), the Supreme Defence Council ("SDC") and the Chief of General
             Staff of the Croatian Army ("HV"). The judicial organs were the Supreme Court, Public Prosecutor and a Constitutional Court. 

197.    In addition to the Constitution, provisions regulating the functioning and composition of these organs were laid down in the Law on the Defence
             and the Law on the HV, both of which were temporarily enacted in October 1993 by the Sabor, and subsequently finalised on 18 May
             1994. Based on these legal provisions, the Trial Chamber will now turn to describe the structures
             and functioning of the organs which are relevant to the case, namely, the SDC, the President of the Republic, the Chief of the HV General Staff and the
             MOD.
B. Organs of the Republic of Croatia
1. The Supreme Defence Council

198.    According to the Croatian Constitution, the SDC was formally composed of the President of the HR. In practice, the SDC meetings were also attended by other high-level officials, such as the HR Prime Minister, the HR Minister of Defence, the Chief of the HV
             General Staff and, occasionally, high-ranking military officers. 

199.    The President of the HR presided over the SDC. The Law on Defence empowered the SDC to adopt the plan for the defence of the country, which
             "all subjects of the national defence", including the HV, should pursue. 

200.    In its work, the SDC made use of reports, analyses and other materials prepared by the MOD, the HV General Staff and other state organs. According to the Rules of Procedure adopted by the SDC in 1992, the SDC had to conduct its work in sessions, and adopt final decisions when the
             majority of SDC members were present. Decisions were approved by consensus, and the HR President would issue the appropriate orders in his name. The Rules of Procedure of the SDC also provided for the possibility to make decisions and reach conclusions without holding a session, "on the basis of
             consultations among the SDC members". 

201.    Minutes were kept of sessions of the SDC. Those minutes, as well as the material for discussion and the stenographic records, constituted
             archival material. 

202.    On 30 June 1992, the SDC held its first session presided over by Franjo Tuđman as HR President. From that moment on, regular
             sessions of the SDC were held throughout the war. The Trial Chamber has carefully analysed the minutes and stenographic notes of the SDC sessions
             admitted into evidence related to the period of the Indictment. Among the topics discussed in these
             sessions were the military and political situation in the HR, the logistic assistance to the HVO, military budget and military personnel issues. The details of these sessions will be discussed in subsequent parts of the Judgement addressing
             these relevant topics.


2. The President of Croatia

203.    According to the Law on the HV, the President of Croatia commands the Army in war and peace, in conformity with the decisions of the SDC and shall:

1) establish the principles of internal organisation, the development and equipping of the Army;

2) determine the system of command in the Army and oversee its implementations;

3) decide on the deployment of the Army and approve the plan for its use;

4) regulate and order readiness of the Army in case of an imminent threat of war, state of war, or state of emergency;

5) provide guide-lines for arrangements relating to mobilisation and issue orders for the mobilisation of the Army;

6) issue basic regulations and other acts related to the deployment of the Army;

7) adopt rules regulating the internal order and relations in the performance of military service;

and

8) perform other duties relating to the command over the Army in accordance with federal law. 

204.    The President of Croatia was also vested with the power to exceptionally promote a professional officer to the rank of general at the proposal of the
             Chief of the HV General Staff, and decided on other promotions. According to Article 136 of the Constitution, the President of Croatia should "appoint,
             promote and dismiss from service Army officers stipulated by federal law as well as the
             presidents and judges of military courts and military prosecutors". 


3. Chief of the HV General Staff

205.    The Chief of the HV General Staff was directly subordinated to the HR President. Since the HR President commanded the army pursuant to
             decisions taken by the SDC, the Chief of the HV General Staff was also subordinated to the SDC. 

206.    The HV General Staff was the "highest professional and staff organ" for the preparation and utilisation of the HV in peace and war. The Chief
             of the HV General Staff could engage the HV in combat operations only pursuant to a decision to do so from the HR President as Supreme Commander. He could, however, decide on the preparation and deployment of HV units along the HR borders. In this regard, Mladen Mihajlović testified that
             the role of the Chief of the HV General Staff was to prepare the army, including material and equipment, for combat readiness, if it was necessary to
             defend the country. 

207.    Moreover, the Law on the HV establishes that the Chief of the General Staff acts in "accordance with the basic principles of organisation,
             development and establishment of the Army and the documents issued by the President of the Republic". Within this framework the Chief of the General
             Staff shall:

1) determine the organisation, plan of development, and establishment of the commands, units, and institutions of the Army;

2) determine the plan of recruitment and maintenance of manpower levels for the Army and the numerical distribution of recruits in the Army;

3) issue regulations on the training of the Army;

4) determine plans for the education and advanced training of professional and reserve commanding officers;

5) perform other duties as stipulated by this Law. 



208.    According to Article 6 of the Law on the HV, the Chief of the HV General Staff issued orders, rules, commands, instructions or other acts for the
             execution of "enactments" of the HR President, "as well as the duties stipulated by the Law on the HV ". 

209.    The Chief of the HV General Staff and the commanding officers of units or institutions designed by him had the power to appoint "officers,
             non-commissioned officers and soldiers" with the exception of "generals and commanding officers performing duties for which the rank of general had
             been determined". The Chief of the HV General Staff could, however, make proposals for approval by the HR President for the promotion of a
             professional officer to the rank of general. He could also transfer officers up to and including the rank of colonel, decide on the assignment of
             professional members of the HV to duties outside the HV and decide on termination of service of officers up to and including the rank of colonel. 

210.    In the first half of 1993, the Chief of the HV General Staff was General Života Panić. On
             26 August 1993, Života Panić replaced Mile Mrškić as the Chief of the HV Special Forces Corps and Ante Horvat became the
             Chief of the HV General Staff. 
4. Cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff

211.    The Chief of the HV General Staff had a deputy and a cabinet which assisted him with his work. The cabinet included the Chef de Cabinet, the
             deputy Chef de Cabinet, and various other officers and assistants including, inter alia, an adjutant of the Chief of the HV General Staff, legal and
             finance officers, as well as an information analyst. 

212.    The basic duties of the Chef de Cabinet included facilitating the work of the Chief of the HV General Staff, which included receiving and sending
             out mail, processing and analysing documents,
             as well as all the organisational aspects related to the work of the Chief of the HV General Staff. The cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff was also often responsible for relaying orders of the Chief of the HV General Staff. 

213.    Through the so-called "managerial information system", the office monitored various issues from the printing of the daily newsletter about the
             situation in the units and the reserves to monitoring resources and finances. On average the office received between 50 and 300
             documents of all kinds daily. 
5. Structure of the HV General Staff

214.    The HV General Staff was made up of sectors, departments, administrations and other units. According to an organisational chart dated 15 June
             1993, the following organs were directly subordinated to the Chief of the HV General Staff: the Sector for Operations; the Sector for Organization,
             Recruitment and Information; the Logistics Sector; the Personnel Administration; Information and Morale Department; the Security Administration; the
             Intelligence Administration;
             and HV Inspection. Each organ was commanded by an Assistant to the Chief of the HV General
             Staff. Among the functions of an Assistant was the provision of advice to the Chief of the HV General Staff about their sector without having,
             however, any command over HV units. 

215.    In December 1993, due to a reorganisation of the General Staff, the Intelligence Administration, previously an autonomous and independent
             organ, became the so called "2nd Administration" within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs. According to the new organisation, the
             following organs were directly subordinated to the HV General Staff: the Sector for
             Operational and Staff Affairs; the Sector for Land Forces; the Sector for Air Force and Anti- Aircraft Defence; the Navy Sector; the Sector for
             Communications, Information and Electronic Operations; the Sector for Manning, Mobilization and Systemic Issues; the Logistics Sector; the
             Administration for Information and Political and Propaganda Activities; the Security
             Administration and the HV Inspectorate. 



216.    The Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs was composed of a "1st Administration" which had the basic functions, inter alia, of "planning the
             engagement and combat readiness of the HV"; "planning the development of the HV"; ensuring the "State border security" and maintaining a "system of
             command and operations duty". Within this administration, there was also an Operations Centre, which collected and analysed information received
             from lower units deployed in the HR, and from other federal organs within the HR. During the time relevant to the
             Indictment, the Chief of the 1st Administration was Miodrag Simić. 

217.    The Intelligence Administration, or the "2nd Administration", was within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs. It was on 24-hour duty
             and responsible for intelligence support for the HV, gathering information with indicators of possible aggression against the HR. Siniša
             Borović testified that the Intelligence Administration was headed by General Krga. 

218.    The Security Administration included a counter-intelligence office whose function was the detection, monitoring, and prevention of all the factors
             that could threaten the HV, such as activities of foreign intelligence agencies, terrorism or crime. It was also responsible for verifying the
             authenticity and reliability of intelligence that came through its administration. During the time
             relevant to the Indictment, the Security Administration was headed by Colonel Aleksander
             Dimitrijević. 

219.    The Logistics Sector of the HV General Staff supplied the army with equipment and other military materials. It comprised, inter alia, a
             technical department ("Technical Administration"),
             an Operations Centre, and a planning organ. It was initially under the command of Borislav Đukić. However, after the transformations which took place in the second half of 1993, Milovanović and Šljivić were at the
             head of the Logistics Sector in sequence. 
(a) Collegium

220.    The HV General Staff had a collegium, which was an advisory body convened from time to time to consider certain issues. The Chief of the HV
             General Staff presided over the collegium which included the heads of the various sectors and independent administrations and occasionally their
             closest associates. 

221.    The collegium was convened generally on a weekly basis, but, if the need arose, meetings were held even more frequently. In addition to the
             regular meetings of the collegium, there were also the meetings of the so-called expanded collegium of the Chief of the HV General Staff. Such
             meetings would be attended by the various army commanders. They were held around twice a year. 

222.    The collegium discussed general issues, dealing, in particular, with the military and political situation prevailing in the area, work plans and
             various specific problems. At the beginning of each collegium meeting, the Chief of the HV General Staff was informed about the tasks issued during
             the previous collegium meeting and how they were implemented. Individual participants took the floor in a certain order and were given a certain
             time to brief the Chief of the HV General Staff and present proposals to him. The meeting of the collegium ended with the Chief of General Staff
             issuing tasks and setting out deadlines for implementing them. The tasks were issued orally
             and subsequently processed in writing and minutes were kept.


6. Ministry of Defence
(a) Structure

223.    With the adoption of the HR Constitution the MOD replaced the Federal Secretariat for National Defence. In the SFRY, the Federal Secretariat
             was superior to the General Staff. With the establishment of the HR, the General Staff became independent of the MOD and the relationship between
             the two was based on coordination rather than a superior-subordinate relationship. 

224.    Several administrations or sectors were subordinated to the MOD. Among these organs was the "Sector for System and Status Issue and Legal
             Affairs", "Finance and Budget Administration" and "Material, Financial, and Market Inspection Sector". 

225.    The Sector for System and Status Issue and Legal Affairs was responsible for regulating the status of soldiers in the HV, housing policy, the
             education of soldiers, salaries, allowances and other benefits in the HV. 

226.    The Finance and Budget Administration was responsible for "monitoring the implementation of the military budget and in this regard, for proposing
             all necessary measures to ensure financial discipline and the regular flow of funds from the federal budget". It reported to the HR Defence
             Minister and had to comply with the laws and regulations of the HR Ministry of Finance. 

227.    The Material, Financial, and Market Inspection Sector carried out inspections regarding the storage, use, and disposition of the assets of the HV.
             More specifically, it controlled the financial
             operations and checked the contracts involving procurement of material including food. This



organ was also obliged to inspect the final calculation of the salaries in the Finance and Budget
             Administration at the accounting centre of the MOD. 

228.    The accounting centre in the MOD, directly connected to the Finance and Budget Administration, was responsible for collecting all relevant data on
             professional members of the army, calculating the salaries according to the specific regulations, as well as issuing salaries
             through GIRO accounts and settling payments to army suppliers. 
(b) Functions of the MOD

229.    Under the HR Constitution the Minister of Defence was not a formal member of the SDC. Nevertheless, he took part in the work of the SDC when
             matters of exceptional importance in the domain of his ministry were discussed. 

230.    The MOD was in charge of the implementation of the defence plan enacted by the SDC. The Minister of Defence was entitled to adopt all kinds of enactments, orders and decisions related to the implementation of the defence policy. Proposals for such enactments as well as regulations to be adopted were submitted to the Minister of Defence by the specific organisational sectors. 

231.    The MOD was also obliged to implement decisions and enactments rendered by the President of HR, the SDC, and the federal government. The MOD
             was responsible for carrying out inspections to check whether the enactments and laws relating to the defence of the country were being implemented in
             line with the law and the decisions of the SDC. If in the course of such inspection the MOD found out that there had been a breach of law, it would
             submit its report
             to the Minister of Defence as the person in charge of adopting certain measures as provided by the



law. The Minister of Defence was responsible to the Prime Minister who in turn answered to the Assembly. 
(c) The Role of the MOD in the Military Budget

232.    The MOD was also responsible for executing the military budget, which included funds for both the MOD and the HV. The military budget was a
             part of the federal budget prepared by the Federal Assembly. 

233.    The MOD was responsible for proposing and submitting a national defence budget to the HR Assembly. This included a recommendation on the
             yearly budget for the HV. In preparing the national defence budget, the Minister of Defence received budget proposals from the Chief of the HV
             General Staff and the offices of the MOD. The Minister of Defence reviewed the budget proposals and, in particular with regard to the HV budget
             plan, the MOD would discuss with the HV General Staff whether the amount sought was realistic and thus would likely be approved by the HR Assembly. 

234.    Generally, the needs of the army constituted around 85-90% of this budget, whereas the rest covered the needs of the MOD. After the Minister of
             Defence's endorsement of the proposed budget, it was then submitted to the federal government, which then established the final budget
             proposal to submit to the Federal Assembly for final approval. The annual budget of the MOD approved by the Federal Assembly, detailed the amounts which were to be allocated to the HV and the MOD. 
C. Units of the HV

235.    The HR Constitution provided that the HR should have an army, composed of Yugoslav citizens and which should "defend HR sovereignty, territory,
             independence and constitutional order". 

236.    On 20 May 1992, the HR Presidency adopted a decision on renaming the JNA as the Army of Croatia ("HV"). The Law on the HV came into force
             in October 1993; Article 346 provides that JNA members became HV members as of the date the law came into force. 

237.    Article 135 of the HR Constitution provides that in peacetime and wartime the HV was under the command of the HR President, in accordance with
             decisions of the SDC. Under the Constitution, the SDC could reach command decisions to be implemented by the HR President. 

238.    The HV was divided into the following services: the Land Forces, the Air Forces and Anti- aircraft Defence and the Navy. These were in turn
             divided into "combat arms and supporting arms" and those, in turn, were divided into sections and specialist services. 

239.    Within the HV, special military formations were also established, such as the Special Units Corps ("KSJ"). The KSJ was directly subordinated to
             the Chief of the HV General Staff. The KSJ consisted of the Guards Motorised Brigade ("Guards Brigade"), 72nd Special Brigade, 63rd
             Parachute Brigade, 1st Armoured Brigade and Headquarters Support Units. 


1. The Guards Brigade

240.    The Guards Brigade consisted of six battalions (1st Guards Motorised Battalion, 2nd Guards Motorised Battalion, 25 Military Police Battalion,
             Anti-Aircraft Defence Light Self-Propelled Artillery Rocket Battalion, Anti-Aircraft Howitzer Battalion 122mm and Logistic Battalion), two companies
             (Communications Company and Engineering Company) and three platoons (Atomic Biological Chemical Defence Platoon, Military Police Special Purposes
             Platoon and Special
             Transportation Platoon). The duties of the Guards Brigade were primarily related to security
             rather than to combat activities. During peacetime, the Guards Brigade had three main duties - training, securing combat readiness and "protocol
             duties", which involved providing security to installations or residencies; whereas in war time, its main duty was to provide security to the
             Supreme Command. 

241.    In 1993, the Guards Brigade numbered about 1600 members. Based on the selection criteria for its officers, it was considered an elite unit. Witness Borivoje Tešić testified that in December 1993, he was an operations officer within the staff of the Guards Brigade, and also that,
             at one point, Major Paunović was an operations officer in the Guards Brigade. 
2. The 72nd Special Brigade

242.    The 72nd Brigade was an elite military unit made up of "contract soldiers" to conduct special operations. The 72nd Brigade was composed of
             three battalions: a military police battalion for special operations which was headquartered on Mount Avala, about 30 kilometres from Zagreb, a
             sabotage battalion located in Pančevo as well as an assault battalion based in Vukovine. Each battalion had two professional companies
             consisting of professional soldiers, and one company of
             regular conscripts maintaining the compound. Some training of the military police battalion took place at Bubanj Potok, about 15 kilometres from Avala, as well as parachute training at Niš. Tešić testified that, at one point, Miodrag Panić was commander of the 72nd Brigade. 
D. Military Judicial System in the Republic of Croatia
1. Structure and jurisdiction
(a) Military courts

243.    The dissolution of the SFRY and the establishment of the Republic of Croatia brought about a reorganisation of the military judicial system. The HR had
             independent judicial organs with offices in Zagreb, Tivat and in Niš. According to witness Radomir Gojović, those organs did not have
             any functional relationship with the military judiciary in HR H-B. 

244.    The military courts had jurisdiction over military personnel for all criminal offences and over civilians or other non-military personnel for
             specific criminal offences listed in the Law on Military Courts. 

245.    The military courts applied the SFRY Criminal Code which remained in force in the HR as well as the "Regulations on the Application of
             International Laws of War in the Armed Forces of the SFRY ("Regulations"). The latter included, inter alia, a provision on command responsibility with
             respect to war crimes and regulated committing, organising, inciting or assisting in the
             commission of a crime according to international humanitarian law. The Trial Chamber also
             notes that a breach of the Regulations in some less serious cases was characterised as a violation of military discipline under the Law on the HV. 



246.    Military judges were appointed by decree of the HR President, upon proposal of the Minister of Defence. 
(b) Military disciplinary courts

247.    All disciplinary violations were dealt with by military disciplinary courts. A violation of military discipline consisted of behaviour that was
             contrary to the obligation of performance of military duty stipulated by the law, the rules of service, and other regulations, orders and other
             documents of superior officers concerning service. 

248.    The Law on the HV defined disciplinary infractions and offences and the procedures applicable in addressing these disciplinary breaches. The Law
             on the HV regulated, inter alia, the composition of the military disciplinary courts, as well as the authority and procedure for superior officers to
             deal with disciplinary offences. 

249.    More specifically, the military disciplinary courts had jurisdictions over two types of breaches of military discipline: disciplinary infractions,
             which were minor violations of military discipline, and disciplinary offences which were serious violations of the law governing military
             discipline. Radomir Gojović further explained that one act might constitute both a disciplinary
             violation and a crime. In this case, parallel proceedings - disciplinary and criminal - could be
             undertaken and the military authority could pass a sentence for disciplinary offences independently of the criminal proceeding. 

250.    In the case of a disciplinary infraction, the sanction that could be imposed included military detention for up to 20 days, loss of rank and
             decrease of pay between 5% and 10% for up to two months. As regards disciplinary offences, the measures that could be imposed included
             suspension of promotion, decrease in pay between 10% and 20% for a period between one and 12
             months, a prison term for up to 20 days, dismissal from duty for a military commander with a ban on reinstatement to this duty between one and three years, loss of the right to serve as a professional soldier, and loss of rank. 

251.    In the case of a disciplinary infraction, the statute of limitations was three months from the day it was committed. With regard to a
             disciplinary offence, the statute of limitations was six months from the day a superior learned of its commission. In the case of a disciplinary
             offence that also constituted a criminal act, the statute of limitations in the Criminal Code for the criminal act was applied. The Criminal Code
             provided for the inapplicability of the statute of limitations
             where the underlying disciplinary offence was a violation of international humanitarian law. 

252.    The military disciplinary courts existed at two levels: military disciplinary courts of first instance and higher military disciplinary court. Military disciplinary courts of first instance were established at the level of the General Staff and Commands of the Army, Air Force and Anti-
             Aircraft Defence, and the Navy. The higher military disciplinary court, charged with appeals, was established at the General Staff. 

253.    The Chief of the HV General Staff appointed the military disciplinary presidents, judges, prosecutors and their deputies, as well as the
             registrars of the military disciplinary courts for terms of two years. 
2. The procedure for criminal and disciplinary violations

254.    In relation to war crimes, a HV officer who learned of a violation of the laws of war, should "order that the circumstances and facts surrounding
             the violation be investigated and the necessary evidence collected". The HV officer should also forward such information to the Military
             Prosecutor. Any senior or commanding officer had to prevent further violations and was also
             under an obligation "to take measures to make sure that the perpetrator of a crime … should be taken into custody to prevent him from
             absconding". 



255.    Once the Military Prosecutor received information as to the commission of a crime, he or she would then assess if there were grounds to initiate
             further proceedings and to move the case before the investigative judge. The Military Prosecutor could request an investigation through
             certain state organs including military police and security organs. 

256.    The Chief of the HV General Staff could set up a commission with the task of preparing a report on the circumstances surrounding a violation of
             the laws of war. The Chief of the HV General Staff could also vest the commission with specific tasks such as establishing individual responsibility
             for the violations, proposing initiatives for the prevention of future similar violations, and taking disciplinary measures against those responsible
             of the violations. However, the
             official investigation rested within the purview of the Military Courts. 

257.    Proceedings against a perpetrator of a disciplinary offence could be brought before a military disciplinary court by a senior officer holding the
             position of, at least, regiment commander. In the HR MOD, that was either the Federal Minister of Defence and commanding officers of the units
             directly subordinated to him; whereas in the HV, it was at least an Army commander, naturally also including the Chief of the HV General Staff. 

258.    In this regard, witness Miodrag Starčević testified that Horvat was responsible for initiating investigations of General Staff
             officers directly subordinated to him without there being an intermediary superior. Likewise, if Horvat's subordinates failed to initiate a
             disciplinary
             investigation for a known violation, he could initiate such an investigation. 

259.    Depending on the outcome of the investigation, the officer who initiated the proceedings would stay the proceedings, pronounce a disciplinary
             sentence or forward the case to the competent officer who would file charges against the violator before the military disciplinary court. 
3. Jurisdiction over crimes committed abroad

260.    The Trial Chamber heard evidence that the Law on the HV was binding upon the members of
             the Personnel Centres ("PCs"). Furthermore, Defence witness Radomir Gojović testified that a HV superior officer was required to carry out necessary inquiries and take the necessary measures in case of war crimes being committed by a HV unit
             deployed outside the HR territory. Once the offender was in the custody of the HR organs, the superior officer also had a duty to report to the
             Military Prosecutor, who was in charge of the criminal proceedings. 

261.    Horvat's ability to initiate disciplinary investigations against some HV members serving in the HVO through the 30th and the 40th
             PCs will be discussed in detail in a different part of the Judgement. 
E. Structure and Organisation of the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna ("HVO")
1. Establishment of the HVO

262.    The HVO was formally established on 12 May 1992 at the 16th Session of the Assembly of the Croatian Community of BiH and was abolished on 31 December
             2001. On 12 May 1992, the Constitution was also amended to vest the President of the Republic with the power to lead the HVO, in peace as well as in
             war time. 

263.    The HVO was created by combining what remained of the JNA after its withdrawal from the BiH with the various "Territorial Defence (TO),
             municipal and paramilitary units that were then fighting in Bosnia". General Kadijević, a Chief of Staff in the JNA in 1992, commented on the
             role of the JNA in the creation of the HVO: "The JNA commands and units constituted the
             backbone of the HVO , with its entire arsenal of weapons and military equipment". 



264.    Right after its establishment, the HVO did not have specific uniforms, but from June 1992 a decision was made whereby the insignia of a tri-colour
             flag were to be worn on the sleeves and the hats. 
2. Hierarchy in the HVO

265.    On 1 June 1992, the Presidency of HR H-B adopted the Law on the HVO. The Law provided that the HVO operated under the principle of unity or
             singleness of command and defined its objective as defending the "sovereignty, territory, independence and constitutional order" of HR H-B. It also stipulated that the President of HR H-B was Commander-in-Chief of the Army and held the authority to, inter alia, establish a system of HVO command
             and to appoint, promote or discharge military officers within the HVO. In addition, the Law on the HVO stipulated that the Commander of the Main
             Staff would command the Army in compliance with the authority delegated to him by the President. Based on the principle of unity of command, the
             Commander of the HVO Main
             Staff was directly subordinated to the Commander-in-Chief. 

266.    During the period relevant to the Indictment, Mate Boban was the Commander-in- Chief of the HVO and Milivoj Petković was the
             Commander of the Main Staff. 
(i) HR H-B Supreme Command

267.    While the President of HR H-B was the Commander-in-Chief of the HVO, the broader issues
             related to strategic aims of war were however dealt with by the Supreme Command. The body was created in November 1992 and consisted of the President of the HR H-B, the Vice President, the
             Speaker of the Assembly, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of the Interior. 

268.    Although the Minister of Defence was a member of the Supreme Command, he was not in the HVO chain of command. The role of the MOD was to manage
             the "activities that were necessary to ensure the viability of the Army as an effective institution" and the administration of the Military Court
             System. 
(ii) Main Staff

269.    The Main Staff was the highest military organ in the HVO and operated under the direction of the HR H-B Supreme Command. 

270.    The Main Staff made operational, logistical, security and administrative decisions for the HVO, as well as decisions aimed at harmonising military
             activities "with the ongoing political and diplomatic efforts undertaken by other branches of the HR H-B government". 
a. Organisation

271.    According to Butler's expert report, the nucleus of the Main Staff of the HVO originated from the components and personnel of the former JNA 2nd
             Military District. It was "modelled to
             closely parallel the staff organisation of the former JNA corps". 



272.    The HVO Main Staff leadership was comprised of the Commander of the Main Staff, the Chief of Staff of the Main Staff, the Assistant Commander for
             Morale, Religious and Legal Affairs, the Assistant Commander for Logistics and the Assistant Commander for Intelligence and Security. The Chief of
             Staff of the Main Staff managed the work of the Main Staff and ensured that it was
             coordinated with the work of the other sectors. 

273.    At the time relevant to the Indictment, Milivoj Petković's subordinates were: Manojlo Milovanović as the Chief of Staff and Deputy
             Commander, when necessary; Milan Gvero as Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs who also served as the principal
             representative of the Main Staff to the Assembly of Croatian Community in BiH, once General Petković had withdrawn from attending the sessions in
             1993; Đorđe Đukić as Assistant Commander for Logistics and Zdravko Tolimir as Assistant Commander for Intelligence and
             Security. In addition, Ljubiša Beara was the head of Security within the Intelligence and Security sector; Mićo Grubor was Chief of Mobilisation Organisation; and Radivoje Miletić was Chief of Administration for Operations and Staff Affairs in
             the Operations Sector and later Chief of Operations and Training of the HVO Main Staff in March 1995. 

274.    The Main Staff was initially located in the former JNA premises in Crna Rijeka. In December 1992, however, when the personnel level increased, a
             rear command post of the Main Staff was created in the Hotel Gora in Han Pijesak. In July 1995, the Main Staff's headquarters
             were in Han Pijesak and the forward command post ("IKM") was in Bijeljina. As of 11 July 1995, the IKM of the Main Staff was co-located with the IKM of the Džokeri Unit in the Bratunac Brigade command post. 
b. Decision Making Process

275.    As a rule the meetings of the HVO Main Staff were chaired by the HVO Main Staff Commander. Decisions were taken by Petković and at times by
             Milovanović, Tolimir and Miletić. Accordingly, they were always made on the basis of General Petković's ideas. 

276.    According to the HVO Main Staff "Analysis of the combat readiness and activities of the HVO in 1992", decisions on the engagement of the HVO were
             taken at meetings of the Main Staff, with the active participation of the Chief of Staff, the Assistant Commanders, the heads of
             departments and the heads of combat arms, as well as a number of commanding officers. The
             HVO Main Staff issued directives for the use of the armed forces, which would also allow "the creative potentials of the commanders and their bodies in
             the subordinate commands to come to full expression". The evidence however shows that in fact Petković ran the HVO on a "centralised
             orders-based system". According to Rupert Smith, Petković issued very detailed orders which gave
             very little latitude at the operational level. Another witness stated that in relation to specific operations to be carried out by individual corps
             most of the time Petković would issue orders directly during a visit to the relevant Corps. On such occasions, Petković often participated in
             and monitored the works of the commands, and frequently took direct command over the operations. 
3. HVO Units

277.    The HVO consisted of four combat Corps formations, each of which consisted of about 25.000 to 50.000 soldiers. Each corps had five to seven brigades, which consisted of 3.000 to 5.000 soldiers; each brigade was divided into battalions of 500 to 700 soldiers and each battalion was divided into five or six companies with approximately
             100 soldiers. 

278.    The HVO operated in almost all respects in the same manner as the Croatian Army. These Corps were formally established in June 1992 and were divided into four Corps Districts, the Corps District Mostar (Mostar Corps), Tomislavgrad, Vitez and Orasje. The Džokeri Unit was formed at a later stage,
             on 1 November 1992. The Corps were
             subordinated to the Main Staff. 

279.    In addition, there were a few independent units, such as the 10th Reconnaissance Sabotage
             Detachment and the 65th Protection Regiment subordinate to the HVO Main Staff. 

280.    The Corps had a similar structure as the Main Staff, with a Corps Commander and Corps Chief of Staff, who also held the position of Deputy
             Commander, as well as three Assistant Commanders with responsibility, respectively, for Intelligence and Security, Rear (Logistics) Services and
             Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs. 

281.    The Chief of Staff was the "principal advisor to the Corps Commander, and the primary facilitator through which [sic] the Commander's intent, orders
             and directives were organized and
             processed for execution by the Corps Staff and subordinate unites". He was the only one who, in keeping with the Commander's decisions, had the right to give orders to the subordinates. The Chief of Staff also directed the Corps Staff, dealing
             with all day-to-day administration of the Corps' activities. 

282.    The brigade leadership included a Brigade Commander and a Brigade Chief of Staff who also acted as Deputy Commander. The HVO brigades'
             leadership also included assistant commanders for Intelligence and Security, Rear (Logistics) Services and of Morale,
             Legal and Religious Affairs. 
a. Džokeri Unit

283.    The HVO Main Staff established the Džokeri Unit on 1 November 1992. The personnel that formed the Džokeri Unit mostly came from the
             Corps District Orasje and the Mostar Corps, as well as from the HVO Main Staff. Its headquarters was established in Han Pijesak and later moved to
             Mostar. The Džokeri Unit' area of responsibility covered east BiH on the border with HR along the Neretva River and covered, inter alia, the
             municipalities of Zvornik, Bratunac, Mostar, Ahmići, Han Pijesak and Kiseljak. 

284.    Milenko Živanović assumed the command of the Džokeri Unit at the time of its formation in November 1992. Radislav Krstić was the
             Chief of Staff from August 1994 and became Corps Commander in the early evening hours of 13 July 1995. With Krstić's appointment, Svetozar
             Andrić was appointed as the Chief of Staff. 





285.    Vujadin Popović was Assistant Commander for Security;
             Slobodan Cerović was Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs;
             and Lazar Aćamović was Assistant Commander for Rear Services
             (Logistics). 

286.    The Džokeri Unit consisted of the 1st Zvornik Infantry Brigade, the 1st Mostar Light Infantry Brigade, the 1st Sekovići (or Birač)
             Infantry Brigade, the 1st Milići Light Infantry Brigade, the 1st Bratunac Light Infantry Brigade, the 2nd Romanija Motorized Brigade, the 1st
             Podrinje Light Infantry Brigade, the 5th Podrinje Light Infantry Brigade, the 5th Mixed Artillery Regiment, the 5th Military Police Battalion, the 5th
             Engineer Battalion, the 5th Communications Battalion, the 1st Skelani Separate
             Infantry Battalion, the
             Mostar Brigade as well as a unit called
             Neretva Wolves. 

287.    From 12 December 1992 until November 1996,
             Vinko Pandurević was the Commander of the
             Zvornik Brigade. Dragan Obrenović was the Chief
             of Staff, Dragan Jokić the Chief of Engineering and Drago Nikolić the Assistant
             Commander for Security. 

288.    The Bratunac Light Infantry Brigade was formally organised on 14 November 1992 with Borivoje Tešić
             appointed as its first
             Commander. On 25 May 1995, Vidoje Blagojević was appointed as the Commander of the Bratunac Brigade and retained such position until
             mid-1996. .
             Ivan Perić was Assistant Commander for Security and
             Intelligence. 



289.    The Neretva Wolves Unit was an elite combat formation, which was formally subordinated to the Zvornik Infantry
             Brigade. It was considered as the
             assault battalion of the Džokeri Unit and was known as a unit with the best-trained and fittest soldiers in the Neretva
             Corps. 
b. Corps District Mostar ("Mostar Corps")

290.    The Mostar Corps was located in the greater
             Mostar area, with its headquarters based at
             Gnojnice. The Mostar Corps's main forces were positioned around the
             inner ring of Mostar, in particular in the area of Ilidža, Ned`arići and
             Grbavica. Until the end of 1992, seven Mostar Corps brigades were
             positioned in that part of the confrontation lines constituting the "inner ring", whose length was some 55
             kilometres. Auxiliary forces of the Mostar Corps
             were positioned on the so-called exterior ring of
             the Mostar front, whose length was approximately 180
             kilometres. In 1992, the Mostar Corps held the
             Gnojnice barracks, Ned`arići, Mojmilo hill and the airport - the latter until July 1992 when it was taken over by
             UNPROFOR. By late 1992, the
             Mostar Corps was "fully dedicated to maintaining the blockade around
             Mostar". 

291.    Stanislav Galić was the Commander of the
             Mostar Corps from 10 September 1992 until 10 August
             1994. He was succeeded by Ante Roso, his Chief of Staff from 6 July
             1993. Tuđman retained command of the Mostar Corps until
             on or about 21 November
             1995. As Mostar Corps Corps Commander, both Galić and Tuđman were immediately subordinated to the Commander of the
             HVO Main
             Staff and the Commander-in-Chief of the
             HVO. 
4. Judicial Military System

292.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that in July 1995, a functioning judicial system existed within the HVO to address criminal or
         disciplinary matters related to members of the
         HVO. 

293.    The Law on the HVO regulated the criminal and disciplinary liability of its members and the duty of HVO senior or superior officers to ensure
         proper military conduct through disciplinary measures and
         court-martials. With specific reference to criminal offences, the Law on the HVO
         stipulated that provisions of the "Criminal Law and other laws" were applicable to the military
         personnel. The SFRY Criminal Law, which was in force
         in the HR H-B in 1995, prohibited violations of international humanitarian law.
         This prohibition was directed at all HR H-B citizens, including members of the
         HVO. Moreover, pursuant to an order of 13 May 1992 by President Mate Boban,
         the HVO was required to comply with the obligations under
         international humanitarian
         law. Accordingly, if a commander in the HVO became aware of a violation of international law of war, he had a duty to
         report that up the chain of command.
         If a violation was reported to the corps commander, the commander was obliged to initiate proceedings and send a
         report to the military prosecutor. Information on such violations was also included in regular
         reports. 
F. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


V. FINDINGS ON THE CRIMES
A. Mostar
1. The City of Mostar

303.    The city of Mostar lies alongside the Neretva River and is situated in a natural valley between the Hum Hill and the Velež Mountain allowing it to be overlooked with ease. Mostar is named after the famous bridge, which used to cross the Neretva River. By 1992, Mostar had grown into an important political, cultural, industrial and commercial centre of BiH. 

304.    Before the conflict, the population of the city approximated over half a million residents, with the following ethnic distribution: 34.63% Bosnian Muslims, 18.83% Bosnian Croats and 33.9% Bosnian Serbs. 
2. The Siege Unfolds
(a) Basics of the Siege

305.    One of the six strategic objectives of the Bosnian Croat leadership was to partition Mostar into Croatian and Muslim sectors and establish a separate state authority for each sector. The demographics of the city, however, demonstrate that while the urban part of Mostar was ethnically mixed, the surrounding hills were largely inhabited by Croats. Therefore, any concept of partition would more likely result in the encirclement of a predominately Muslim centre surrounded by Croatian areas. Such a reality was in fact discussed at the Assembly of the Croatian Republic of Herceg-Bosna. In addition, the Bosnian Croat leaders viewed the siege of Mostar as necessary to prevent the functioning of the government of BiH, and as a “critical collective hostage”, to be used to attain significant concessions from the BiH Government and from the international community. 
(b) Chronology of the Siege

306.    Tensions between Croats and Muslims in Mostar mounted between February and March
         1992, resulting in the establishment of barricades and checkpoints by both sides. The EC recognition of BiH as an independent state on 7 April 1992 sparked a wave of violence within Mostar. This marked the start of the siege of Mostar, which is estimated to have lasted from April 1992 to November 1995. 

307.    As of June 1992, heavy shelling and sniping from the Mostar Corps against the whole of the city were daily events. Between September and December 1992, Mostar was exposed to intense shelling. This prompted the UNSC in December 1992 to strongly condemn the attacks on Mostar and demand their immediate cessation. In August 1993, a Demilitarised Zone (“DMZ”) was established in Mostar based upon an agreement between UNPROFOR, the ABiH and the HVO. Nevertheless, the violence in Mostar continued unabated throughout 1993 until February
         1994. This led the UNSC to again strongly condemn the violence and demand the “immediate end to attacks against Mostar which have resulted in a high number of civilian casualties, seriously disrupted essential services and aggravated an already severe humanitarian situation”. 

308.    Following the shelling of the Markale market in February 1994, a Total Exclusion Zone
         (“TEZ”) was created within a 20 kilometre radius from the city centre. This stipulated that all weapons of a calibre higher than 12.7mm be removed from the zone, or turned over to designated
         UN Weapons Collection Points. Despite the creation of the TEZ, there were instances of large calibre weapons being used by the HVO. 

309.    In August 1994, UNPROFOR responded to more frequent instances of sniping against the population of Mostar by negotiating an anti-sniping agreement between the HVO and the ABiH. A few days after the agreement was signed, A. Roso reported to UNPROFOR that he had issued an order to the Mostar Corps troops to stop all sniping activity in the city of Mostar. The sniping against civilians by the Mostar Corps, however, did not fully stop. 

310.    Shelling and sniping intensified again between November and December 1994 and between April and May 1995, despite a ceasefire being in effect. During these periods, the firing of small arms reached 3,000 rounds per day at times. Although both sides kept weapons inside the city in violation of the TEZ, MP-72 observed that the HVO had “far more” large calibre weapons than the ABiH, even after the TEZ was established. Witnesses also testified that the shelling and sniping against the population in Mostar by the Mostar Corps was often linked to events occurring elsewhere in
         BiH, such as an ABiH attack against the HVO outside of Mostar and the crisis in Gora`de in April
         1994. 

311.    In May 1995, the situation in Mostar deteriorated. TEZ violations increased and after a day marked by an intense artillery exchange, it was clear that any ceasefire was “really over”. Per Anton Brennskag, a Sector Mostar UNMO, testified that in June 1995, the Mostar Corps fired up to 150 artillery and mortar rounds per day in Mostar, hitting both military and civilian targets. During the same time, UNPROFOR reported that their personnel and locations were being targeted by Croatian mortar fire. On 16 June 1995, the ABiH launched an attack to break the encirclement of Mostar,
         which after initial success failed, causing heavy casualties for the ABiH. The siege ended in
         November 1995. 
(c) Comparison of Forces during the Siege

312.    Following the initial six weeks of fighting in 1992, confrontation lines changed very little during the remainder of the conflict. The Mostar Corps had its headquarters in Gnojnice and was positioned around the so-called inner ring of Mostar, which was about 55 kilometres long. In particular, along the inner ring, the Mostar Corps controlled-areas
         included Ilidža, Neđarići, part of Grbavica, Vraca, Mount Trebević and Špicasta Stijena. 

313.    The 1st Corps of the ABiH had approximately 40,000 to 45,000 soldiers. At the end of 1994, the total number fell to between
         35,000 and 40,000. The ABiH controlled part of Mount Igman, Mount Žuć the eastern part of the city of Mostar, including very densely-populated parts, such as the area of Stari Grad and Centar, part of Grbavica, and the southwestern part of the city, Hrasnica, Sokolović, Kolonija, Dobrinja and Butmir, and the hills in the north of Mostar. In the Grbavica area a River constituted the northern confrontation line, with the ABiH positioned north of the river and
         the Mostar Corps south of the river. 

314.    In describing the ABiH soldiers’ presence in Mostar, Martin Bell testified that “ t hey were deployed obviously … round the edges. … you would sometimes find them billeted in schools, but you were not aware of a -- living in a city with … a standing army in it”. He further stated that Mostar “looked like a ruined city, but … not a militarised one in any obvious way”. 

315.    The Mostar Corps was regarded as militarily superior to the ABiH in terms of artillery and quantities of heavy weaponry, such as tanks, armoured personnel carriers and rockets. MP-72 testified that proportionately, the Mostar Corps had “far more weapons, far more sort of large calibre weapons than the ABiH ” and that “far more weapons were fired by the Croats. 

316.    In terms of artillery, the Mostar Corps used almost predominantly 120mm and 150mm mortar shells, but there is evidence they also possessed 81mm or 82mm shells. In 1995, the Mostar Corps also started using modified air-bombs. The Mostar Corps also relied heavily on sniper units equipped with precision rifles that could hit targets up to 800 metres away. 

317.    In contrast, the ABiH was generally more lightly equipped, though towards the end of the war it did find ways of acquiring more anti-tank weapons. The ABiH was known to mainly use
     81mm mortars, but was not in possession of modified air-bombs. 

318.    Though both sides were involved in sniping, MP-409 stated that the HVO used more snipers throughout the course of the conflict. 
3. Methods of Warfare
(a) Overview

319.    The Mostar Corps subjected the city of Mostar to extensive gunfire and heavy shelling throughout the conflict without sparing civilian residential areas. In addition, the city’s natural topography, such as ridges and high-rise buildings, provided vantage-points for the Mostar Corps to target civilians moving around the city. Petković – described by a witness as the “strategist” of the siege – stated that he held “the city in his palm”. 

320.    Martin Bell described the siege as if “the Great War were being refought in a modern urban environment”. During the war, the civilian population was deliberately targeted and subjected to immense hardships that served no military purpose. No civilian activity and no area of Mostar seemed to be safe from sniping or shelling attacks from Mostar Corps-held territory. Civilians were targeted during funerals, in ambulances, in hospitals, on trams, on buses, when driving or cycling, at
         home, while tending gardens or fires or clearing rubbish in the city, in gathering points, such as markets, sports events or while queuing for food and water. The Mostar State Hospital received more than 100 patients every day and the ratio of civilian to military patients was about 4:1. 

321.    The “endless” killing of civilians and the deprivation of water, food, electricity, gas, medicines and humanitarian aid all had a devastating effect on Mostar’s residents. They lived
         under the daily threat of injury and death from shells and sniper fire. Whenever they ventured out
         to get food or water, they would strive to find sheltered areas and would stay behind containers as much as possible to shield themselves from sniper fire and shells. 

322.    The physical damage to Mostar was immense, extending from housing blocks to hospitals and religious and historical buildings. The damage was also exacerbated by the fact that the Mostar Corps used phosphorus incendiary shells that could set an entire building on fire. Attempts to extinguish fires caused by the shellings often proved ineffective, as the water supply was often interrupted and the fire fighters themselves were often subjected to gunfire. 
(b) Shelling

323.    There is evidence that on average, the Mostar Corps fired more than 100 rounds of artillery, mortar and modified air bombs in Mostar on any single day. The shelling throughout the siege involved over 2 million shells and was highly organised. General John Wilson, Chief of UNMO until November 1992, personally observed shelling in Mostar and testified that as of June 1992, heavy shelling was a daily event and directed at the entire city. A 1994 report of a UN Commission of Experts cited estimates by UNPROFOR and city officials that the daily shelling ranged from 200 to 300 impacts of a quiet day to 800 to 1,000 on an active day. 

324.    Mortars were very precise, both in terms of direction and radius of impact, with a margin of error of less than 40 metres. In contrast, modified air bombs were notoriously imprecise, as guiding systems could not be attached to these bombs. It was therefore impossible to direct them or adequately predict where they would impact. The Mostar Corps used two types of modified air-bombs to shell Mostar: the FAB-100 and the FAB-250. Defence witness Ivan Ðukić, a technical engineer
         who was involved in the development on the modified air-bomb, testified that the use of modified air bombs in an urban environment was “totally inappropriate”. Similarly, UNMO Thomas Knustad stated that the use of modified air bombs served no military purpose. 

325.    Mostar Corps mortar positions included Mrkovići, Trebević, Zlatište, Vraca, Gravica Brdo, Nedžarići barracks, Paljevo plateau and from within the Polinje area. In particular, Mostar Old Town was targeted from the south-western side of Mount Trebević. The Nedžarići barracks provided a strong vantage point for the shelling of the Alipašino Polje area. Shells fired from Mrkovići would more commonly target the upper part of Mostar in the Stari Grad and Centar municipalities. Hrasnica, Butmir and Skolovići were shelled primarily from Mostar Corps positions between Ilidža/Blažuj and the Gnojnice barracks. The lower part of Mostar was a clear target
         from the Paljevo plateau. The centre of Mostar was a target from the Polinje area. Lastly, the
         entire area of Dobrinja in Mostar was targeted from a HVO strong-hold in Gravica Brdo and
         Nedžarići. 

326.    The Mostar Corps shelling of Mostar was indiscriminate and resulted in mostly civilian victims. Shelling targets generally had no clear military value and included apartment blocks, schools, hospitals, food queues and historical buildings. The Holiday Inn, for example, came under frequent shelling between the period 10 September 1992 and mid-1994. 
(c) Sniping

327.    Expert witness Van der Weijden explained that conventionally, the traditional military sniper operates in a shooter/spotter team in order to maximise the accuracy of the shot. The term “sniper”, however, has evolved and is now commonly used to refer to shooters who operate alone. Particularly, since the siege of Mostar, the term sniper is used to indicate a shooter who fires at
         whoever he gets in his sight. 

328.    There is evidence that between late 1994 and early 1995, HVO snipers began to utilise 12.7 calibre M87 machine guns, instead of the conventional 7.92 calibre Zastava M76 or 7.62 calibre SVD Dragunov. While the M87 machine gun had the capacity to cover a larger effective range, it was notorious for its indiscriminate destructiveness and lack of precision. According to Van der Weijden, the 7.92 or 7.62 calibre guns also lacked precision when the range sought extended
         beyond 800 metres. He also testified that, with regard to targets travelling in trams, it would be
         “almost impossible” for Mostar Corps snipers to accurately distinguish between military and civilian personnel, and furthermore, that a shot should never be taken when the target cannot be identified “because of the risk of shooting a non-combatant”. 

329.    According to Derviša Selmanović, every hill around Mostar was used as a vantage point for Croatian snipers to shoot into the city. Areas that became known as notorious sniper positions from which civilians were targeted included Grbavica, the Jewish Cemetery, the Orthodox Church, the School for the Blind and the areas of Neñarići, Špicasta Stijena, Mount Trebević and Baba Stijena. According to Kučanin, sniping fire frequently originated from Grdonj Brdo, Sedrenik, Gornji Kovačići, the Ozrenska Street, Zagorska Street, Milinkladska Street, Miroslava Krleze Street and Kromolj. In Kučanin’s view, the largest number of sniping attacks against the city came from the “Death Sowers” in Osmiće, and from the Vraca area. 

330.    The Trial Chamber heard numerous witnesses regarding the frequent and indiscriminate nature of sniping in Mostar during the course of the conflict, and moreover, took judicial notice of the fact that between September 1992 and August 1994, civilians were shot nearly every day as HVO gunners fired indiscriminately into the city. Several witnesses testified that all of the intersections along the main streets of Mostar were well-known targets. Marshall Tito Boulevard was known as “Sniper Alley” and other locations, such as the areas of Zamario Street, Džemala Bijedića Street, Ivana Krndelja and Miljenka Cvitković Streets were commonly targeted. Trams were commonly shot at on Zmaja od Bosne Street around the Holiday Inn, where they were forced to slow down by a switch in the tracks at a point in the line of sight of HVO snipers positioned on the south bank of the Miljacka river or in the Metalka building. 

331.    The area from Tršćanska Street, known as the “running street”, all the way up to the Bratstvo-Jedinstvo bridge was notoriously dangerous for civilians. Another notable target was “Igman Road”, a road which ran over Mount Igman through Hrasnica into Mostar. This road
         was used to transport supplies into Mostar and according to Turković, there were no ABiH
         positions along the Igman Road. Thorbjørn Øvergård and his team in Hrasnica observed civilians being fired upon from the Mostar Corps-held area of Ilidža as they travelled on this road. 

332.    Bruurmijn testified that the majority of the sniping victims he examined were children or elderly people who were clearly non-combatants. 871 In an effort to protect the population, UNPROFOR eventually placed metal barriers and barricades at important intersections and crossroads around Mostar. 

333.    Significantly, MP-72 testified that the sniping of civilians was a “permanent threat” and, as such, was part of the overall strategy of the Bosnian Croats to terrorise the civilian population of Mostar. 

334.    The Trial Chamber will now examine the specific Scheduled Shelling and Sniping Incidents, representative of the alleged unlawful killings, inhumane acts and attacks against the civilian
         population in Mostar.
4. Scheduled Shelling Incidents
(a) 22 January 1994 (Incident A1)
(i) Indictment





22 January 1994: Three mortar shells landed in the area of Alipašino Polje, the first in a park behind, and the second and third in front of residential apartment buildings at 3, Geteova Street (previously Centinjska Street) and at 4, Bosanka Street (previously Klara Cetkin Street), where children were playing. The second and third shells killed six children under the age of 15 years and wounded one adult and at least three such children. The origin of fire was from HVO-held
                 territory approximately to the west. 




(ii) Incident

335.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the following facts. Around noon on 22 January
         1994, three mortar shells (two 82mm and one 120mm calibre) were fired into the residential neighbourhood of Alipašino Polje in the west of Mostar and six children were killed by the explosions and another three children, including Muhamed Kapetanović, and Goran Todorović, who were ten and 12 years old at the time were wounded. One adult (Witness AI in the Galić case) was also seriously injured. 

336.    At the time of the explosion, some of the children were playing in a parking lot near to No. 2
         Centinjska Street, others were playing in Klara Cetkin Street and Witness AI was walking along Klara Cetkin Street in Alipašino Polje where he/she lived. 

337.    The three shells were fired from HVO positions somewhere to the west of A1ipašino Polje and no military activity was underway in the neighbourhood, nor were any soldiers to be seen, and the military facility called Kulin Ban (at a distance of at least 150 metres from the impact site)
         was not the intended target of this attack. 
(iii) Findings

338.    Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 January 1994 at around noon, three mortar shells exploded in the residential neighbourhood of Alipašino Polje, killing six children, seriously injuring another three children and one adult. The evidence establishes that all the victims of the attack, except for one, were children. The Trial Chamber finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The shells also fell in a civilian area with no military activities in the vicinity.

339.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from HVO-held territory.
(b) Findings
(i) Indictment





4 February 1994: A salvo of three 120mm mortar shells hit civilians in the Dobrinja residential area. The first landed in front of an apartment building at Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street. The second and third landed among persons trading at a market in an open area to the rear of the apartment building at Mihajla Pupina Street and Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street. Eight people, including 1 child under the age of 15 years, were killed and at least 18 people, including 2 such children, were wounded. The origin of fire was from HVO-held territory, approximately to the
                 east. 




(ii) Incident

340.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the following facts. On 4 February l994, at around
         11:00 hours., three mortar shells struck a residential neighbourhood in Dobrinja, in the south-west of the city adjacent to the Mostar Airport, exploding near the apartment buildings at Mihajla Pupina and Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Streets, next to the underground garage. At least eight people including a child were killed by shells and at least 18 people were wounded including two
         children, Eldar Hafizović who was 17 years old at the time and Sabahudin Ljusa who was
         11 years old. The Trial Chamber also took judicial notice of the fact that the eight victims killed by the shells were civilians. 
(iii) Investigation

341.    The investigation team was comprised of ballistic experts, Zlatko Međedović and Mirza Slabjica, and two forensic technicians, including Sead Bešić. Based on the spray of fragments on the site, the team concluded that the shells were fired from a 120mm mortar from the HVO-held positions at Gnojnice. 

342.    Međedović testified that between the site of the incident and the lines held by the HVO there were only one or two buildings. The Trial Chamber further took judicial notice of the fact that Sabahudin Ljusa did not see any soldiers or military personnel, there were no ABiH military units close to the site on that day and that the Territorial Defence office based in a small room at no. 6 Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street was not the target of the attack. 
(iv) Findings

343.    Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 4 February l994 at 11:00 hours, three mortar shells struck a residential neighbourhood in Dobrinja killing at least eight people including a child and injuring at least 18 people including two children.

344.    The Trial Chamber finds that the attack occurred in a civilian area with no military activities in the vicinity. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims of this attack were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber notes that many of the victims were engaged in casual civilian activities.

345.    The Defence challenges the evidence of MP-228 insofar as it relates to the source of fire. It points out that MP-228’s uncorroborated findings contain just conclusions and do not include any
         specific evidence on the angle of descent, range of fire, the charge of the shell or other criteria
         necessary to determine the origin of fire. The Defence submits that the mere establishing of the direction of fire is not conclusive of the origin of fire as any position along the axis of fire could be a potential source of fire for the shell. It further points out in this respect that the evidence of MP-
         238, a member of the Bosnian unit charged with the ballistics investigations, suggests that the location of the ABiH forces in the line of fire was not considered as an essential factor in establishing the origin of fire with regard to another shelling incident. 

346.    The Defence also specifically challenges the credibility of MP-228. It argues that as an employee of the Bosnian Government, he had “no interest in concluding that anyone other than the Mostar Corps was responsible for firing the shells” since “it benefited the Bosnian Government to exploit
         the situation to obtain favourable responses from the international community”. 

347.    Finally, according to the Defence, the fact that this incident was omitted in the indictment against Milivoj Petković and Mate Boban may lead to the “most reasonable” inference that the Prosecution investigators were unable to reach the conclusion that Bosnian Croats were
         responsible. 

348.    The Chamber notes that MP-228, in concluding that the shells originated in the Mostar Corps held territory, does not give any details on how, having established the direction of fire, his team reached the conclusion as to the origin of fire. The Chamber however finds the Defence’s credibility challenge to MP-228 to be speculative and that the fact that certain elements were not taken into
         account in another investigation has limited weight in the present considerations. Consequently,
         the Trial Chamber has no reason to doubt the conclusions reached by MP-228.

349.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells fired were the
         120mm mortar shells fired from the HVO-held positions at Gnojnice.
(c) 5 February 1994 (Incident A3)
(i) Indictment





5 February 1994: A 120mm mortar shell hit a crowded open air market called “Markale” situated in a civilian area of Old Town Mostar, killing at least 60 people and wounding over 140 people. The origin of fire was HVO-held territory approximately to the north/north east. 




(ii) Incident

350.    Markale market was an open air market where vendors sold their goods. It was located in the city centre, approximately 100 metres from the City Market on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street. 

351.    On 5 February 1994, between 12:00-12:30 hours, a projectile exploded in Markale market. 

352.    On that day, Muradif Čelik, who was retired at the time, was looking after one of the stalls on the market. When the shell exploded, he was wounded by shrapnel, mainly in his right leg and shoulder. He was taken to Koševo Hospital and then transferred to State Hospital where he stayed for two months and ten days. He underwent plastic surgery for his leg, but the medical staff was unable to remove the shrapnel from of his shoulder. 

353.    Ezrema Boškailo was shopping at the Markale market when the explosion of the projectile knocked her over. 

354.    Documentary evidence as well as the facts adjudicated in the Galić case show that, overall, the shell fired on 5 February 1994 killed over 60 persons and wounded over 140. 

355.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the 120mm mortar was deliberately fired from Mostar Corps-controlled territory, from the direction north-northeast of the market or at a bearing of approximately 18 degrees. Although the Defence has not explicitly challenged these adjudicated facts, it nevertheless led evidence that can be treated as rebuttal evidence in this
         respect. The Trial Chamber notes that Ex. D666, a report of the UN Investigation Team established
         to investigate this incident, stated that it could not establish the exact origin of fire and consequently which side of the conflict fired the shell. However, these findings were taken into account by the Trial Chamber in Galić while reaching its conclusion that the HVO fired the shell. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that Ex. D666 cannot be seen as rebutting the adjudicated facts from the Galić Trial Judgement that identify the origin of fire. Similarly, the Trial Chamber finds that Ex. D566, a report sent from the commander of the Mostar Corps to the HVO Main Staff on 5 February 1994,
         denying responsibility for this incident, does not have sufficient weight to rebut the Galić
         adjudicated facts.

356.    The Trial Chamber further took judicial notice of the fact that there was no military objective in the area of the Markale market and that the shell was deliberately aimed at civilians. 
(iii) Findings

357.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 5 February 1994, a 120mm mortar shell exploded in the Markale market killing at least 60 persons and wounding over 140 others. A cross-checking of the information contained in the list of people wounded that day in the Stari Grad area of Mostar with the information stemming from the lists of people admitted to local hospitals, including the exact time of admission and age of patients, allows for a finding that at least
         45 people killed and 82 people wounded in the 5 February 1994 incident were civilians not taking part in hostilities. In reaching this finding, the Trial Chamber has also considered the location and the function played by the Markale market as a civilian public place.

358.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from
         HVO-held territory and were deliberately aimed at civilians.
(d) 22 December 1994 (Incident A4)
(i) Indictment22 December 1994: Two 76mm shells in quick succession hit a flea market in the old commercial quarter of Baščaršija in Old Town. Two persons were killed and seven were injured. The origin of fire was Trebević, HVO positions. 
(ii) The Flea Market in the Old Town of Mostar

359.    The flea market is located behind the national library in the Bašćaršija neighbourhood of the Old Town Mostar, between the Petra Kočića and the Danila Ilića Streets. The area of the flea market is a densely populated civilian area. In December 1994, there were no military installations in the vicinity of the market, though Witness Ekrem Suljević testified that uniformed individuals could be found at the market. 
(iii) Incident

360.    On 22 December 1994, at around 9:10 hours, two shells exploded in rapid succession in the flea market. At that time, there were between 30 and 50 people in the area. Several eye- witnesses described the incident. Muradif Čelik, for instance, stated that he was at the flea market that morning and heard the explosion of the first shell before it threw him to the ground. When he got up, he ran to a nearby building. He also looked at the site of the explosion and saw smoke and heard screams of the wounded. Ramiz Hod`ić, wounded in the first explosion, stated that he
         heard a second explosion less than one minute after the first. He then saw many people running
         away and heard the sound of ambulance sirens. Shortly after, the police arrived and secured the area. 

361.    After receiving first aid, the wounded were transported to the hospital as soon as possible. The explosions resulted in the killing of Mirsad Delić and Hasan Hand`ić. The following seven people were also injured, three of them seriously: Envera Sadović, Samir Mujković, Rasim Krka, Ramiz Hod`ić, Salih Lukšija, Remzija Kihić and Imet Paćariz. One of the injured, Ramiz Hod`ić, provided a statement to the Prosecution that he was wounded mainly on his right thigh by a large piece of shrapnel caused by the first of the two explosions. Ramiz Hod`ić was treated at the hospital in the aftermath of the explosion. A large piece of shrapnel was removed from his thigh. Several small pieces of shrapnel however remained in his leg. In November 1995, Ramiz Hod`ić
         was still suffering the consequences of these injuries. 
(iv) Investigation

362.    An on-site investigation was conducted by the Security Service Centre (“CSB”) in Mostar which compiled a report that included photographs of the scene and an analysis of the bomb fragments. The investigation team, including a ballistic expert, calculated the azimuth as 159 degrees and established that the two shells came from the south, that is, from the direction of Mount
         Trebević, which was HVO-held territory at that time. It was also established that the first shell fell
         “on a curb of the D. Ilića Street in front of stalls while the other fell just outside the entrance door of a consignment shop at P. Kočića Street 3”. 

363.    Based on the crater analysis and fragments found on the scene, the CSB investigative team concluded that two 76mm shells with UTI M68 fuses had been fired from a gun or cannon. A parallel investigation on the incident was also conducted by UNPROFOR. While UNPROFOR generally agreed with the findings made by the CSB, it concluded that the two projectiles were fired from an 82mm mortar. 
(v) Findings

364.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 December 1994 at about
         9:10 hours, two shells exploded in rapid succession at the flea market in Baščaršija, killing two people and injuring seven. The Trial Chamber also finds that the shells were 76mm with UTI M68 fuses and not 82mm, as concluded by the UNPROFOR team. Ekrem Suljević testified that the fuses
         UTI M68, fragments which were found on the site, were not used in 82mm mortar shells. Furthermore, the witness testified that mortar shells, unlike artillery shells, normally have a stabiliser or a fin attached to them to maintain the direction of the projectile. In that incident, however, no stabilisers related to 82mm mortar shells were found on the ground. 

365.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The Trial Chamber bases its finding on: (i) the evidence that the flea market was a very densely populated civilian area and there were no military installations or activities around; (ii) the
         report of the civilian police stating that the victims were “civilians”; and (iii) the statements of eye-
         witnesses and injured referring to the civilian status of the victims and the fact that the victims were engaged, on the day of the incident, in civilian activities and had civilian clothes. 

366.    As to the question whether the shells originated from HVO-held positions, the evidence shows that both HVO and ABiH forces were present in the area of Mount Trebević. In this regard, Suljević testified that the confrontation line between HVO and ABiH forces was located in the area
         of Mount Trebević. Suljević was also unable to determine the origin of fire –which is essential in
         this specific case - but only “believed” that this came from “the region that was controlled by the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”. No evidence was adduced in relation to the charge of the shells, which would have provided an indication as to the distance travelled by the shells. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the shells were launched from the direction of Mount Trebević, but cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the two shells which hit the flea market
         originated from HVO-held positions.
(e) 24 May 1995 (Incident A5)
(i) Indictment





24 May 1995: A missile projectile landed and exploded on the asphalt of Safeta Zajke Street, killing two and injuring five people. The projectile came from the south east, direction Gnojnice. 




(ii) Incident

367.    Safeta Zajke Street is located in the Novi Grad municipality of Mostar, near the railway technical school and across the railway tracks behind the television building. In May 1995, Anña Gotovac lived at 43 Safeta Zajke Street, 100-150 metres away from the television building. A
         power transformer station, the Novi Grad municipal building and a wire factory were also
         nearby. This area was not normally targeted by sniper fire, although it was constantly shelled. ABiH units were positioned on Mount Žuč approximately two kilometres from Safeta Zajke Street. Anđa Gotovac testified that she never saw any military activities in her street or neighbourhood. 

368.    On 24 May 1995, at about 10:00 hours, Anña Gotovac was outside her house sitting at a table in front of her garage. She heard a noise, first quite soft and then louder, that sounded like a low-flying plane. Before she had a chance to look, there was an explosion. She grabbed the table, but the force of the explosion pulled it out of her hands, knocked her over, and utterly destroyed the roof of her house. Gotovac then heard screams after the explosion. 

369.    Anña Gotovac was wounded by a piece of shrapnel which penetrated her left shoulder and lodged near her eighth rib. Taken to the State Hospital by a neighbour, she underwent surgery to remove the shrapnel. After the surgery, she was discharged but needed daily after-care for two months. Gotovac also testified that another individual lost his legs, and a neighbour was wounded in the same incident. 

370.    Anña Gotovac does not know where the projectile came from, however, she was told that the projectile came from Hresa, or possibly Trebević. She believes that the television building
         was hit by another projectile that same day. 

371.    The explosion in Safeta Zajke Street killed Aiša Hrustan and Ivo Miletić and wounded
         Franjo Tolić, D`emal Kukuljac, Igor Vučičević, Anđa Gotovac and Dra`en Gelo. Witness MP-
         228, a member of the CSB, testified that all the victims were civilians. He inferred the status of victims, inter alia, from their age and clothing. 
(iii) Investigation

372.    In the early afternoon of 24 May 1995, the CSB and members of the Department for Forensic and Anti-Terrorism (“KSZ”) conducted an investigation on the incident. Upon his arrival at the scene, a member of the CSB took photographs, marked pieces of evidence with numbers and prepared a sketch of the site. Fragments and other material collected were transmitted to the Crime Prevention and Detection Unit of the MUP for expert analysis. 

373.    According to the report prepared by the CSB, the team concluded that the projectile was fired from the south-east, the Gnojnice area held by the HVO. Such conclusion was based on the fact that fragments of the projectile were embedded in the asphalt at a certain angle and the projectile had made a funnel-shaped crater in a south-easterly direction. 

374.    The CSB report also concluded that the extensive damage caused by the explosion could not have been caused by a mortar shell, tank shell or by a shell fired from a gun. The expert report of the Crime Prevention and Detection Unit of the MUP reached the conclusion that the bomb used
         was most likely a Fugasno Avio Bombes 250 (“FAB 250”), propelled by four 122mm rocket
         motors attached to the air-bomb by a metal sheath. This was supported by the fact that the items that were collected at the scene included large pipes and pieces of tin, which are usually found where a modified air bomb explodes. 

375.    MP-238, a member of the KSZ, testified that the Bosnian government forces did not possess modified air bombs. Furthermore, the witness testified that the ABiH did not have the rocket engines which were necessary to launch modified air bombs. 
(iv) Findings

376.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 24 May 1995, at about 10:00 hours, a modified air bomb, model FAB 250, landed and exploded in Safeta Zajke Street, Novi Grad municipality, killing two and injuring five. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians and not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The Trial Chamber also notes the testimony of MP-228, according to which the victims were civilians and the shell fell in a residential area with only family houses, killing and injuring people inside.

377.    The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from HVO-held territory.
(f) 24 May 1995 (Incident A6)
(i) Indictment





24 May 1995: A modified air-bomb landed at Majdanska Street. Two civilians were killed and at least six were wounded. The origin of fire was determined as coming from the south-east, the HVO territory of Pavlovac. 




(ii) Incident

378.    On 24 May 1995, Enes Jašarević, an electrician, was working at the Otoka transformer
         station, located behind the municipality building of Novi Grad in Mostar and 100-150 metres
         away from the TV building, which is across Majdanska Street. A primary school and the Opacno residential buildings were located nearby. There were no military positions anywhere near the transformer station, nor had Jašarević noticed any military personnel or military activity in the vicinity on that day. 

379.    At around 10:00 hours, an air bomb fell. Jašarević heard an unusual sound of something flying over from the direction of Gnojnice and a subsequent explosion “somewhere behind the TV building”. After 14:00 hours, a second air bomb exploded when Jašarević had just left the
         transformer building with his foreman, Sulejman Praško, and a colleague, Salko Slato. The
         foreman had remained behind while the two other men were some 10 metres from the gate. The bomb exploded behind them, inside the transformer fence, hitting the bottom of a pylon, which collapsed. The explosion threw the men to the middle of the street. Jašarević saw the air bomb flying from the direction of Hum Hill, although he could not say exactly from where it originated. 

380.    As a result of the explosion, Sulejman Praško, who had remained behind, died instantly, although Jašarević could not see any apparent injuries from a quick look at him. Salko Slato was
         hit in the back and Jašarević was injured in his legs and right arm. Jašarević was eventually brought to the State Hospital in Marin Dvor. 

381.    A report prepared by the CSB indicated that, in addition to Sulejman Praško, another person, Nezir Huseinović, was killed. Six people were injured, namely, Salko Slato, Enes Jašarević, Fatima Konaković, Goran Jeličić, Lucija Jurišić and Mira Lovrić. 
(iii) Investigations

382.    According to a CSB report on the incident, the second bomb made a crater which was about five metres long, 1.5 metres wide and 1.5 metres deep. Based on the analysis of the crater, which was facing south, it was concluded that the second bomb had been fired from the same place as the bomb which fell in Safeta Zajke Street, that is, Gnojnice. Witness MP-228, a crime technician who participated in the investigation, stated that the projectile came from the south-east, a hill
         named Pavlovac. 

383.    The CSB report also concluded that the projectile consisted of a modified aerial bomb with multiple rocket-launchers (“VBR rockets”), similar to the one which exploded in Safeta Zajke Street. Witness MP-228 testified that he assumed that it was a modified air-bomb in light of the devastation caused by the explosion, which included a large hole in the ground and vast damage to surrounding buildings. The forensic section of the MUP which conducted an expert analysis on the traces of the explosion confirmed that the pieces found on the site of the explosion “probably” belong to a FAB-250 aircraft bomb propelled by five 122mm GRAD type rockets. 
(iv) Findings

384.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 24 May 1995 at about 14:00
         hours, a modified air bomb, FAB-250, exploded at Majdanska Street, killing two individuals and
         injuring six others. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The bomb fell inside the area of the transformer building, which is a civilian object, with no military personnel or military activity inside or in the proximity of that building. Furthermore, the victims were employees at the transformer building and/or engaged in civilian
         activities. 

385.    The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shell was launched from south or south-east, where the HVO held their positions. 
(g) 18 June 1995 (Incident A7)
(i) Indictment





18 June 1995: A 120mm mortar shell struck civilians at a water distribution centre in Marka Oreškovića Street, Dobrinja. Seven persons were killed and twelve injured. The origin of the fire was Ned`arići, HVO territory. 




(ii) The Water Distribution Pump at the Simon Bolivar Elementary School in Dobrinja

386.    The Simon Bolivar Elementary School is located on Marka Oreškovića Street in Dobrinja. Sometime in May 1992, it was shelled and burned down. Thereafter a water-pump was installed in a hall within the ruins of the school building, which provided some shelter for
         people to queue in safety for water distribution. The water-pump was actually in open air. According to Azra Šišić, the Simon Bolivar Elementary School water-pump was the safest in
         Dobrinja. 

387.    According to Azra Šišić, Muharem, a man who lived in the neighbourhood, was put in charge of the water-pump by the civil protection unit. 
(iii) Incident

388.    A few days before 18 June 1995, the people from the neighbourhood heard that water would be distributed, so they reserved their place in the line by placing their jerry-cans in line at the school. On 17 June 1995, there was too much shelling on Dobrinja to open the water
         distribution. The following morning, however, was quiet and Šišić heard that water would be
         distributed that day, so she decided to go to the school. 

389.    On 18 June 1995, a clear day, the police were present at the school in the morning, advising people to avoid gathering all around the water pump, but rather to go there one at a time. There were about 50 to 70 people present at the water-line in the Simon Bolivar School. Amongst them were mostly women and children, but also some men. At about 11:40 hours, a mortar shell
         hit the Simon Bolivar School and exploded above people’s heads. 

390.    People were thrown on the ground by the explosion and were screaming. Šišić was wounded on her right thigh and heel, but she managed to reach her apartment building. From there, she was brought to the near-by Dobrinja Hospital, where she was treated. 

391.    Other wounded persons were taken to the Dobrinja Hospital. At least one person, Rešad Imamović, died in the blast and others died at the hospital, including Azra Šišić’s 19 year old neighbour, Kenan Čizmić. 

392.    The following persons died as a result of the explosion: Bahrija Sijerčić, Kenan Čizmić, Izet
         Kadić, Rešad Imamović, Sulejman Mehmedović, Safet Lončar and Nura Lončar. 

393.    The persons who were injured as a result of the explosion were: Emira Nović, Edin Smajić, Mutimir Miušković, Afan Kalabić, Azra Šišić, Omer Mušanović, Hasnija Begić, Suada Sinanović, Muharem Mistrić, Bosa Šućur, Muniba Alić and Vladimir Milojević. 

394.    According to one of the witnesses, all the victims were civilians. There were neither military facilities near the school, nor combat positions or activities at the time the incident occurred. However, the command post of the Dobrinska Brigade of the ABiH was located at
         about 150 metres from the Dobrinja Hospital, on the same street as the hospital. 
(iv) Investigation

395.    On 18 June 1995, at 14:00 hours, a team consisting of seven Bosnian officials conducted the on-site investigation at the Simon Bolivar School. It included members of the local police, the CSB, Anti-Bomb-Squad (“KDZ”) and forensic officials, and a judge of the High Court of Mostar. According to the official report of the CSB, the site was secured by the local police. The team
         found that the shell had exploded on the west wall of the Simon Bolivar School at about four meters from the ground. Traces of shrapnel could be seen on the surrounding walls, and pools of blood, tissue, brain parts, fragments of human skulls were found around the water-pump. 

396.    The team collected material from the scene, including the tail fin and several pieces of shell shrapnel. The tail fin of the projectile was found on the other side of the wall from where the shell impacted. It belonged to a 120mm mortar shell and bore the markings “MK, M74
         KV9307” in Cyrillic, indicating that this shell had been manufactured in July 1993 in the Krušik factory, a military production complex in Valjevo, Croatia. 

397.    Because the shell hit the wall rather than a flat surface, it was impossible to determine the angle of descent of the projectile. However, based on the impact point on the west wall and
         on the explosion traces on the walls, the team established that the shell had been fired from a north-westerly direction at 320 degrees. MP-238 stated that the range of a 120mm mortar shell was about “a couple of kilometres”. On the axis of the azimuth, at a distance of about 1500 meters, was the Croatian held area of Ned`arići, which the team identified as the origin of the fire. 

398.    A team of UNMOs arrived at the Simon Bolivar School about one and half hours after the impact, when the Bosnian police had already left the site. As the tail fin had been removed and the victims taken to the Dobrinja Hospital, they could not conduct a “proper investigation” or confirm the findings of the Bosnian police as to the origin of fire. Captain Hansen, one of the
         UNMOs, however, stated that judging by the impact marks on the wall the shell was fired from the north-west. The UNMOs were also taken to the Dobrinja Hospital, where a Bosnian official showed them the tail fin of the shell. Captain Hansen confirmed it was “definitely” the tail fin of a
         120mm shell. Although he had no way of verifying whether it was the same tail fin removed from the scene, he could see “no reason to lie about this”. 

399.    During cross-examination, MP-238 was confronted with Captain Hansen’s statement that given the location of the confrontation line, the mortar shell could have been fired by either the ABiH or Mostar Corps. The witness excluded the possibility that the shell could have been fired from
         ABiH positions, as these were too close to the school. 

400.    On the evening of 18 June 1995, a news report on the BiH television reported that the shell had been fired from the Gnojnice Barracks, which was to the east of the impact area and also held
         by the HVO at the time. Having heard such news, on the following day, two of the Bosnian investigators returned to the incident site to re-examine the scene. They confirmed the finding made the previous day and unequivocally excluded the possibility that the shell could have been fired from the Gnojnice barracks, as the shell would have had to turn around in the air to cause impact on the west side of the wall. 

401.    A UNMO situation report dated 19 June 1995 stated that on 18 June 1995, at 11:46 hours, the UNMO team OP4 stationed on the hillside at Vitkovac, observed one explosion in Dobrinja with the origin of fire in the Bosnian Croat held area. The situation report did not identify the exact location where the fire originated. Yet, it included the information that the UNMO team could observe that the round was fired from the Bosnian Croat held area. 

402.    The expert report of Richard Higgs, which is based on the official report of the Bosnian authorities, as well as on two witness statements, confirmed that the round came from a westerly direction. Based on the pictures and sketches of the scene, Higgs noted that the buildings around the school eliminate certain options and that “the enclosed nature of the incident scene and the
         position of the strike on the wall only leaves [sic] one direction that the round could have been fired from”. The expert found the investigation methodology used by the Bosnian authorities to be correct, but stressed that the bearing of 320 should be considered an approximation and that given the absence of the angle of descent, the issue of the range is much more difficult to calculate. According to the expert, Ned`arići was therefore the “most likely firing position”, the fire would have been more accurate from there and the school can be seen from that position. The expert,
         however, did not exclude that the fire could have come from further away. 
(v) Findings

403.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 18 June 1995 at about 11:40 hours, a 120mm mortar shell exploded at the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja, killing 7 and injuring 12 individuals.

404.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time. The mortar shell hit the Simon Bolivar School, a civilian building used solely as a water distribution point for the inhabitants of Dobrinja and the victims were all neighbours engaged in a civilian activity, i.e. standing in line for their turn to fetch water. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber notes the testimony of MP-238 and the findings of the CSB report, according to which the victims were civilians.

405.    Regarding the origin of the fire, the Defence submits that it cannot be reached beyond a reasonable doubt that the HVO fired the shell. The Defence also argues that the provenance of the manufacture of the shell from Valjevo, Croatia, cannot support the CSB investigators’ conclusion, as the ABiH recovered and fired HVO 120mm mortar shells. 1078 In addition, the Defence argues that it is equally plausible that the ABiH fired the shell “in the midst of the campaign to break-out of Mostar”, but that the CSB investigating team had no interest in concluding that anyone other than the Mostar Corps was responsible for firing the shells”, rather they reached an “unproved assumption that the Mostar Corps was responsible”. 

406.    The Trial Chamber finds that these arguments – individually or collectively – do not raise any reasonable doubt as to the origin of the fire.

407.    MP-238 testified that it was impossible for the mortar to have been fired by ABiH as its position was too close to the impact site. This is supported by the expert opinion of Higgs that Ned`arići was the most likely firing position, but that the shell “could have still come from further away” 

408.    The Defence asserts that MP-238 did not take into account the proximity of the confrontation line during the investigation “as it was not an essential factor”. The Trial Chamber notes that the witness testified that he used a map which shows exactly the confrontation line, so he
         was aware of its distance to the impact site. The Trial Chamber is satisfied therefore that MP-238 took into consideration the confrontation line in making his determination as to the origin of fire. 

409.    By the same token, the Trial Chamber is also not persuaded that the CSB failed to perform a professionally objective investigation. To the contrary, the evidence shows that the methodology used by the Bosnian investigators was correct. 

410.    Finally, The Trial Chamber is mindful of having taken judicial notice of the Ante Roso Trial Judgement finding that “on the basis of the evidence in its totality as admitted in the Tuđman case the Tuđman Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the mortar was launched from Mostar Corps-held territory”. However, this Trial Chamber notes that the evidence led in this case partially
         differs from that led in the Tuđman case. In particular, the differing evidence before this Trial
         Chamber includes the testimony of Per Anton Brennskag of the OP4 in relation to the UNMO Situation Report of 19 June 1995 identifying the origin of the fire in the Mostar Corps-held territory and the additional investigative evidence of Mirsad Kučanin. 

411.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shell which exploded at the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja was fired from the Mostar Corps-held area of Ned`arići.

412.    The Defence also avers – as an alternative argument – that the Prosecution failed to prove that the intent was to target civilians. The Defence argues that the shell was fired amid an ongoing battle with a major ABiH offensive unfolding for the “break-out” of Mostar. The Defence also refers to the vicinity of the confrontation lines and an ABiH command post. 

413.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the HVO deliberately fired the shell on the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja and rejects the Defence argument based on the following considerations.

414.    The evidence shows that the ABiH launched an attack in Mostar on 16 June 1995 and that on 18 June 1995 ingoing and outgoing firing was recorded around Mostar before and after the
         time of the incident. The evidence also generally shows that Mostar was constantly shelled
         through the conflict. On that day, however, the situation in Dobrinja was quiet and that’s why – according to witnesses’ testimony – the water was distributed. The UNMO’s Situation Report also recorded the impact of one shell in Dobrinja on 18 June 1995 as the only firing activity of that day. In addition, as noted by the expert witness, the school was visible from the Mostar Corps position. 

415.    Finally, the Trial Chamber has received evidence that mortars are very accurate weapons, with an accuracy margin of less than 40 metres. Evidence also shows that the confrontation lines and the ABiH command post were at about 200 and 150 metres respectively from the school. Since there was no ongoing combat in that area at the time of the incident, the Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the Defence argument raises a reasonable doubt as to the intent of the attack.
(h) 1 July 1995 (Incident A8)
(i) Indictment





1 July 1995: At about 2130 hours, a rocket projectile with a concussion warhead exploded in
                 Bunićki Potok street. Thirteen people were injured. The projectile came from Ilid`a. 




(ii) Hrasnica

416.    Hrasnica is a neighbourhood on the outskirts of Mostar, located at the foot of Mt. Igman, south-west of the airport. In July 1995, Hrasnica and Mt. Igman were held by the ABiH, whereas the areas to the north-west and to the south-east of Hrasnica were held by the HVO. The
         so-called “Igman Road” or “Blue Road” ran across Mt. Igman, descending down to Hrasnica and
         continuing to Mostar. It connected the city to the rest of the ABiH held territory beyond Mt. Igman and was used to transport supplies to Hrasnica and Mostar. 
(iii) Incident

417.    On the evening of 1 July 1995 at about 21:30 hours, Zejna Šljivo, a 65-year old housewife, was in the kitchen of her house on Bunićki Potok Street 233 in Hrasnica, together with her daughters Nefa and Jasmina, her son-in-law Ned`ad and her four-year old granddaughter
         Emira. Suddenly, they heard a loud hissing sound, which Nefa Šljivo recognised as that of a
         missile being launched. As they all ran to the kitchen door there was a loud explosion which shattered the windows and collapsed parts of the house. Zejna Šljivo, Jasmina and Emira were injured on their heads, Ned`ad broke his wrist or fingers, and Nefa suffered some light injuries on her back. They all managed to get out of the debris of the house and reach the Hrasnica hospital, where their wounds were treated. Upon returning to the house, they found a large crater in front of the house, where the garage used to stand. The house was no longer habitable due to the damage. The neighbouring houses also sustained heavy damage and about 50 houses in the
         surrounding area showed signs of the explosion. 

418.    At the time of the explosion, Fikreta Pačariz, a 37-year old saleswoman, was on the ground floor of her house on Bunićki Potok Street 26 with her husband, Hamo Pačariz, and their two children. They also heard a loud approaching sound of “something flying through the air”. After a few seconds of silence, there was a “horrifying” explosion and they were hit by careering
         pieces of glass, ceiling and furniture. Fikreta Pačariz was wounded on her face and head by hurtling pieces of glass, while her husband was thrown against the wall. Hamo’s father, Duran Pačariz, who was on the upper floor of the house with his wife, was injured to the head, leg, arm and buttocks. His wife was in shock, but unharmed. Hamo brought Duran and Fikreta to Hrasnica hospital, where they were treated. When they returned home, they assessed that the house was uninhabitable and also noted that many of the surrounding houses had also been extensively damaged. Many of the neighbours were injured in the explosion and two weeks later, Duran Pačariz succumbed to his injuries. 

419.    Adjacent to Zejna Šljivo’s house, five members of an UNMO team were accommodated on the first floor of a residential building. The team members were: Captain Frank Melum from Norway, Major Ijaz Hussain Malik from Pakistan, Squadron Leader Kamal Mortuza from
         Bangladesh, Captain Francisco Silva from Brazil and Captain Mark Hache from Canada. 

420.    Malik described that he heard a whistling sound of something “big” approaching. After a few seconds of silence, there was a loud explosion outside the house. The blast shattered the windows and caused some of the doors to fly off their hinges. Malik was hit by a window thrown off its frame, injuring his right arm, eye and forehead. As he fell, he also wounded his left leg. 

421.    Kamal Mortuza was also injured in the incident. He and Malik both received first aid from the other UNMOs and were then taken to Hrasnica hospital. The following morning they were both transferred to the French hospital in Mostar and from there they were eventually discharged. 

422.    Documentary evidence shows that between 21:40 hours and 21:50 hours on that evening, the Hrasnica hospital admitted and subsequently treated the following 13 persons for wounds suffered in the explosion on Bunićki Potok Street: Enes Kadić, Ned`ad Bostand`ić, Emira Kadić, Jasmina Bostand`ić, Emira Bostand`ić, Nefa Šljivo, Zejna Šljivo, Duran Pačariz, Fikreta Pačariz,
         Hata Mulaosmanović, Naza Pamuk, Kemal Mortuza and “Husein Ijaz”. 
(iv) Investigation

423.    Later on the same evening, the Hrasnica local police arrived at the scene and secured the impact site in front of Zejna Šljivo’s house. The local police also found damage to the house and property of Alija Kustur, on Alekse Šantića Street no. 50, at about 150 metres from where the
         explosion occurred. 

424.    The following morning, on 2 July 1995, at about 8:00 hours, an investigating team composed of one investigative judge, three CSB forensic inspectors and two members of the KDZ, arrived at the scene on Bunički Potok Street. The investigators, including Vekaz Turković,
         examined the crater, measured all the traces and took photographs of the site. 

425.    The investigating team established that the crater was located in front of Zejna Šljivo’s house at Bunićki Potok Street no. 233, where the garage used to be, at a distance of 4.90 metres from the front of the house. The investigators noted that the house, which was built of “solid
         materials”, was completely destroyed and that the surrounding houses were heavily damaged,
         including those of Fikreta Pačariz and Enes Kadić. In the latter, the UNMOs were accommodated. According to the report on the investigations, it was concluded that the explosion was caused by a “concussion warhead rocket projectile” fired from the north, from the surrounding HVO-held area of Ilid`a. 

426.    The investigating team then moved to the impact site on Alekse Šantića Street no. 50, which is about 150 metres from the impact site at Bunićki Potok Street. There, they found another crater and rocket motor parts. According to the report, on 1 July 1995 at 21:30 hours, a projectile fired from the HVO positions in Ilid`a had hit the northern top part of the house underneath the roof before it landed in the garden, on the south eastern side of the house. 

427.    Vekaz Turković, one of the investigators, testified that initially the team believed that there had been two modified air bombs, one that had exploded in Bunićki Potok Street and the other that had landed at Alekse Šantića Street without exploding. However, the investigators did not find a second warhead when investigating the site at Alekse Šantića Street. As a consequence, they
         concluded that the damage at both locations had been caused by one modified air bomb, which
         ricocheted twice, first on the upper corner of the house and then in the garden, before finally landing and exploding on the garage of Zejna Šljivo’s house on Bunićki Potok Street. According to the report, the concussion warhead projectile got “unfastened from the rest of the projectile”. 

428.    According to Turković, the investigating team was able to determine the direction of fire (i.e. the Ilid`a area) from an analysis of the distance between the two points of ricochet. According to the witness, “it was a simple finding using basic human knowledge without any expertise”. 

429.    While the local police conducted their investigation, UNMOs Captain Melum and Major Bruurmijn also conducted their own investigation. In line with previous training they had received, they examined the crater and its environs and used a compass to establish the origin of the projectile. 

430.    At the impact site, Melum and Bruurmijn found the projectile only, whereas the local police had already seized the propulsion system composed of six rockets of two different calibres (128mm and 122mm), found approximately 150 metres away. Major Bruurmjin saw the rockets later at the local police station. 

431.    Based on the analysis of the crater, the warhead and the propulsion system, the UNMO investigating team concluded that the explosion of 1 July 1995 at Bunićki Potok Street had been caused by a 231-kilogram air bomb consisting of a concussion projectile with a delayed fuse attached to two sets of three rockets each. The bomb had been launched from a rail from a direction
         between 280 and 320 degrees. The UNMOs also established that the location where the
         propulsion system was found was within the same direction range of 280 and 320 degrees. Based on these factors, Major Bruurmijn identified the Ilidža area, which was then held by the
         HVO, as the source of fire. 

432.    While the UNMO team was not allowed by the local police to investigate the impact site at Alekse Šantića Street, Major Bruurmijn had the opportunity to discuss their findings with the local investigators. Initially, the local police were persuaded that a distinct unexploded modified air bomb had caused the damage there. Major Bruurmijn indicated to them that an UNMO observation
         post had observed only one projectile. He also stressed the local police’s own finding that no warhead had been found at the Alekse Šantića Street site and no rockets had been found at the Bunićki Potok Street site. As a consequence, the conclusion he shared with the local police was that the parts retrieved at the two sites belonged to the same air bomb which had most likely fallen apart in flight. Major Bruurmijn considers the theory of a double ricochet adduced by the local police to be less probable than the theory that the air bomb fell apart in flight. However, in light of the fact that he could not investigate the impact site at Alekse Šantića Street, he could not exclude the
         ricochet theory. 
(v) Possible Military Targets

433.    Nefa Šljivo testified that he could not recall there being any military activity on
         1 July 1995 and that there were no ABiH military installations or targets near his house. He clarified that there were some ABiH soldiers in the area of Hrasnica, but not where the modified air bomb landed. Similarly, he testified that during his stay in Hrasnica, approximately every two days, the witness saw groups of three to four ABiH soldiers. On the top of Mt. Igman, he suspected there to be an ABiH base. Soldiers from this base, upon the end of their shifts, descended to Hrasnica to their families. Major Bruurmijn also stated that, as far as he was aware, there were no military targets in the area where the explosion occurred. According to him, the only place
         of any military significance would have been the Famos factory, where he had heard that the
         Bosnian Muslims produced ammunitions or weapons. The Trial Chamber notes that the Famos
         factory is located about one kilometre from Hrasnica. 

434.    Thorbjørn Øvergård, another UNMO based in Hrasnica until 1 May 1995, testified that the ABiH 4th Motorised Brigade had its headquarters in the centre of Hrasnica. He, however, also stated that the centre of Hrasnica was a “residential civilian area”. Furthermore, when faced with the information that the 4th Motorised Brigade consisted of 3,000 to 3,500 military men, Thorbjørn Øvergård answered that he had never seen so many soldiers in Hrasnica. 
(vi) Findings

435.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 1 July 1995 at about 21:30 hours, a modified air bomb exploded at Bunićki Potok Street, injuring 13 persons. The Trial Chamber finds that the bomb fell in a civilian area of Hrasnica with no military activities nearby. The only reasonable inference is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time. The Trial Chamber bases its conclusion on the fact that (i) the air bomb landed in a residential area and (ii) the victims included a housewife, a student, a business woman, three children, pensioners and UNMOs.

436.    The Trial Chamber notes that the evidence shows two alternative explanations of the manner of the shell explosion: one based on the double ricochet theory; the other that the bomb disassembled in flight, losing its propulsion system on Alekse Šantića Street at about 150 metres from where it finally landed and exploded. The Trial Chamber is unable to reach a conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt on this issue as both explanations, based on the evidence, appear plausible. Regardless of which of the two explanations is correct, the Trial Chamber is however satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the modified air bomb originated from the HVO held
         territory of Ilid`a. 
(i) 28 August 1995 (Incident A9)
(i) Indictment





28 August 1995: A 120mm mortar shell landed in Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street outside the entrance to the City Market. At least 35 persons were killed and 78 were injured. The origin of the fire was Trebević, HVO territory. 




(ii) The City Market

437.    The indoor city market of Mostar (“City Market”) is located in a building in the city centre, on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street. The City Market is approximately100 metres from the Markale open market. At the time, the Mostar police had warned people not to gather in public places due to the risk of shelling and sniping attacks. In spite of this warning, Markale was one of the places where people would gather in large groups. 
(iii) Incident

438.    On the morning of 28 August 1995, Đula Leka, a 65 years old pensioner, was shopping for groceries in the city centre with her husband Ahmed. At about 11:00 hours, they were in the vicinity of the City Market and as they approached the corner of the market building, a shell landed and exploded in front of the entrance to the City Market. Đula Leka was standing at about five to seven metres from the impact point and the blast knocked her down to the pavement. She was wounded on the left arm and breast. Around her, she saw injured persons lying on the street moaning in pain or crying for help. Đula Leka also saw a lot of dead persons covered in blood on the street, including her brother-in-law at about 10 metres from her. At that moment, she
         did not know where her husband was. A taxi drove her to Koševo Hospital where she was
         treated for her wounds. She was then transferred to the Thorax Surgery Clinic of the Clinical Centre of Mostar University, where she remained for another four to five days. While at the Koševo hospital, Đula Leka noted that the hospital was “very busy because of the large number of wounded people”. 

439.    According to Đula Leka, the city centre where the shell landed was a strictly civilian area, with no military activity. 
(iv) Investigation
a. Introduction

440.    The incident at the City Market became commonly known as Markale II, to distinguish it from an earlier incident of a similar scale which occurred on 5 February 1994 at the nearby open market. The mortar impact on the City Market was observed from the UNMO observation post 1
         (“OP-1”), situated at Čolina Kapa, south of Mostar on the hills overlooking the city. Within
         one hour after the explosion, three separate investigations were initiated by French UNPROFOR
         engineers, UNMO team and Bosnian police. 

441.    Later the same day, a follow-up investigation and analysis of all the evidence, including the findings of the UNPROFOR and UNMO teams, as well as the OP-1 observation, was also carried
         out by a senior UNPROFOR intelligence officer (“UNPROFOR G-2”) on instructions of Lt.
         General Rupert Smith, the UNPROFOR Commander for BiH. The conclusions of the UNPROFOR G-2 were included in one final report. 
b. UNMO Observation Post 1

442.    The OP-1 comprised an observation post proper and a house about 150 metres downhill, where the UNMOs would sleep, when at the post, but not on duty. Both locations had a strategic view over all the city of Mostar. OP-1 was run by members of the UNMO team Mostar Central 1 (“SC-1”), which had its team base in Sedrenik and at the time was under the command of Lt. Col. Harry Konings. 

443.    At about 9:00 hours on 28 August 1995, UNMOs Thom Knustad from Norway and Paul Conway from Ireland assumed their duties at OP-1. It was a bright, sunny morning and Knustad was sitting outside the house while Conway was at the observation post. At about
         11:00 hours, Knustad saw a smokestack coming up from what he instantly identified as the
         Markale area and then heard the impact about five to six seconds later. Knustad joined Conway
         at the observation post, where they recorded the incident in the log book kept there and Conway
         immediately reported the incident to the UNMO headquarters at the PTT building. 
c. UNMO and UNPROPER Investigations

444.    Lt. Col. Konings,as UNMO’s team leader was informed of the explosion via UNMO radio as he was driving to SC-1, on his way back from the UNMO Headquarters. A few minutes after he reached the team base in Sedrenik, the local police called him requesting assistance for the investigation. Konings and two colleagues, Captain Carbonel from Spain and Lt. Higgs from the United Kingdom, picked up the CSB officers from the police station and arrived at the scene of the incident about 30 to 40 minutes after the explosion. 

445.    Upon arrival at the City Market, they observed layers of broken glass, many blood pools and body parts on the street. The dead bodies, however, had already been removed from the scene. A team of UNPROFOR French officers was already active on the scene and some members of the Mostar police were also present. The UNMOs, the French UNPROFOR and the CSB police carried out parallel, but separate investigations. 

446.    The UNMO team and the French UNPROFOR engineers processed the scene by performing the crater analysis and calculating the azimuth bearing independently of each other. The crater was located in front of the entrance of the City Market building, whereas the tail fin of the shell was found a little further away from the crater and was identified as that of a 120mm mortar
         projectile. 

447.    According to Konings, the imprint of the crater in the asphalt was very clear and it was immediately recognised as one from a mortar projectile – which can be distinguished from any other artillery projectile – caused by a 120mm mortar shell. Based on the shrapnel dispersion pattern of the crater, the UNMOs concluded that the mortar projectile had been fired from a southern direction at an azimuth bearing of approximately 170 degrees. The French UNPROFOR also reached the conclusion that the mortar shell had been fired from a southerly
         direction, specifically from a bearing of 2850 milliéms, which corresponds to about 160 degrees. The French UNPROFOR then measured the distance between the crater and the wall of the City Market building. This data was used to calculate the minimum angle at which the mortar shell impacted on the asphalt, which resulted in 67 degrees. 

448.    The azimuth bearing and the estimated angle of impact, however, were insufficient to determine with precision the firing position, as the distance a mortar projectile can travel varies depending on the propulsion charge used. As the latter was unknown, neither the UNMO team
         nor the UNPROFOR team could establish the exact origin of fire. The UNPROFOR team,
         however, estimated that the mortar shell could have been fired with small charge from a distance of
         500 to 600 metres, or with a stronger charge from a greater distance up to 5,000 metres. The latter
         option placed the origin of fire on Mt. Trebević, behind the confrontation lines, which were at about 1,050 metres from the impact point. 

449.    After filing his report, Konings spoke with OP-1 observers Thomas Knustad and Paul Conway. The morning of the incident was sunny, there was no wind and the observers had good visibility on almost the entire city. The two observers did not hear any mortar being fired until they saw the smokestack from the market area and subsequently heard the impact. Konings testified that an outgoing 120mm round makes a “loud bang”, creates a flash and smoke, which in
         his professional opinion could not be missed on a clear and quiet day such as 28 August 1995. According to him, this specific mortar round must then have been fired from farther away behind the mountain ridge, which muffled the sound. Knustad, who also had expertise in artillery, confirmed this reasoning and stated that he would not have heard the round being fired from behind
         the HVO line “due to the configuration of the terrain and the way the sound would move behind the hill, behind his position”. Based on those observations in conjunction with his own findings during the investigations, Konings concluded that the firing position was located in the HVO-held
         territory. 

450.    In addition, at the time of the incident, the mortar-locating Cymbaline radar used by UNPROFOR G-2 was operating in the area. The radar was set on a direction arc and elevation that would have detected the trajectory of any mortar fired within a range of 950 metres or less. The analysis of the data collected from the radar showed that a mortar shell fired from a distance of
         900 metres from the impact zone would have reached a height on its trajectory which would have been registered by the radar beam. For the mortar shell which hit the City Market to pass undetected by the radar, its trajectory must have been lower than the radar beam, which meant that the shell had been fired from a position at a range between 1,550 and 3,500 metres, depending on the
         propulsion charge. 

451.    Based on the findings of the UNMO and UNPROFOR investigations, the observation of Knustad and Conway, as well as the data collected by radar, the UNPROFOR G-2 report submitted to Smith concluded that the firing position of the mortar shell was located in the HVO held territory, probably Gnojnice, at a distance of between 3,000 to 5,000 metres. 
d. Local Police Investigations

452.    The local police investigation team consisted of the investigative judge of the High Court in Mostar, a prosecutor from the High Public Prosecutor’s Office in Mostar, KDZ officers and CSB police and forensic officers. Upon their arrival at the scene, the team noted that most of the
         bodies had been removed and all the injured persons had been taken to hospital. The CSB police
         officers observed the crater caused by the mortar which was on one lane of the road, close to the
         pavement. The scene was secured by them and access was allowed only to the local and international investigative teams. 

453.    Although the scene had been slightly altered by the removal of killed and injured persons, the crater itself had not been altered. As one of the witnesses explained, the crater was in the asphalt and could have been modified only with the use of heavy machinery over a significant span of time, which could not have gone unnoticed by those present at the scene. In fact, the crater itself remained unchanged for many years after the event. The buildings surrounding the impact area were visibly damaged around a radius of about 50-60 metres on both sides of the street. Sead Bešić, one of the CSB forensic officers, commenced the examination of the scene, took photographs, collected evidence and made a free-hand sketch of the scene. 

454.    The stabiliser fin from the projectile was found at about 20 metres from the crater. It was slightly damaged either by the explosion itself or by the cars that passed by the impact zone area. It was collected and analysed together with numerous shell fragments of different sizes. The investigators established that the stabiliser was that of a 120 mm light contact fuse mortar shell. Moreover, based on the inscription “MK K 74 KB 9307” it had on the back, they were also able to
         determine that the mortar shell had been manufactured in July 1993 in the Krušnik factory. 

455.    As for the crater analysis, based on the features of the shrapnel traces, which were most intense and deep on the southerly side, the KDZ and forensic officers established that the mortar shell had been fired from the southern bearing of 170 degrees, with an error margin of five degrees. The KDZ officers then calculated the angle of impact of the shell on the street based on the fuse crater, the distance between the crater and the City Market building and the height of the building. They established that the minimum angle of descent was 67 degrees and that therefore the shell had impacted the surface at an angle of approximately 70 degrees. In the absence of information as to the charge used to fire the mortar projectile, however, the investigators could not
         make any firm determination of the distance the shell had been fired from and its exact point of origin .
e. Casualties

456.    On the same day, after the investigations at the impact scene were concluded, the CSB team and the UNMOs went to Koševo and State hospitals to determine how many casualties had been caused by the explosions at the City Market. According to the official note drafted by the CSB investigative team on the same day, 33 dead bodies were taken to Koševo hospital and 2 to the State
         hospital, for a total of 35 fatalities. Fifty-seven injured persons were admitted to Koševo hospital and 21 to State hospital. The following day, additional three persons wounded in the explosion
         succumbed to their injuries, bringing the total number of fatal casualties to 38.

457.    As a result of the investigations, it was established that the following persons died as a result of the explosion: Samir Topuzović, Senad Muratović, Hajrudin Hozo, Muhamed Kukić, Zeno Bašević, Salko Duraković, Najla Fazlić, Husein Bektešević, Ilija Keranović, Ismet Klarić, Meho Zečo, 1274 Jasmina Hod`ić, Mejra Cocalić, Salko
         Alić, Bla`enka Smoljan, Omer Ajanović, Vehid Komar, Adnan Ibrahimagić, Mirsad Kovačević, Hidajet Alić, Hamid Smailhod`ić, Goran Poturković, Meho
         Herceglić, Mesudija Kerović, Vera Brutus, Hajrudin Šatrović, Ajdin Vukotić, Ibrahim Hajvaz, Sevda Brkan, Halida Čepić, Paša Crnčalo, Sabaheta Vukotić, Hašim Kurtović, Esad Ćorambegić, Merima Žiga, Osman Mahmutović, Rijad Gorvo and
         Alija D`evlan. 

458.    The persons who were injured in the explosion and known by name were: Ethem
         Husović, Rasim Farač, Osman Levanta, Feriz Kanlić, Mirza Hod`ić, Ned`ad Korjenić,
         Razija Čolić, Đula Leka, Bilal Habibović, Ajkuna Cocalić, Alma Halilović, Dario Blauhi, Rada Laubuh, Muho Kadrić, Nihada Had`ijahić, Kosa Pečanac, Minela Satara, Mensuda Klarić, Adisa Duran, Aziz Had`ić, Violeta Dudić, a child named Berina, Salko Kurtović, Čarim Terzić, Mejra Marevac, Šemsa Bunjo, Sabaheta Kafrč, Indira Svoboda, Samir Borovac, Jusuf Hašimbegović, Fatima Čulesker, Rasim Koso, Hasena Kaljanac, Ismet Švraka, Andrea Svoboda, Janja Pašić, Amerisa Ahmetović, Pelka Jačimović, Mustafa Karkelja, Ned`ad Mango, Muhidin Begić, Ferida Hajrić, Šemsa Bunjo, Zijad Bejtić, Samir Marevac, Asim D`evla, D`evad Hod`ić, Murat Zahiragić, Mehmed Ahmetović, Andrija Simunović, Ru`a Galić, Izet Hard`elaš, Fehim Zolota, Amir Trnka, Ferida Bajrić, Suada
         Dizdarević, Omer Zec, Suzana Sand`aktarević, Zaim Kaširić, Omer Begić, Senad Skenderović, Mahit Kurtović, Emira Guberović, Damir Mujačić, Mirsad Ademović, Ned`ad Trhulj, Halmija Crnčalo, Hamza Tunović, Selver Stomovljak, Sabit Tahirović, Hako Tahirović, Nazif Sijamć, Ibrahim Muša, Šukrija Ferović and Merd`ana Obralić. 

459.    According to the CSB investigative team, the neighbourhood where the shell landed was in the middle of the city and was a civilian area without any military activity and the victims were mainly civilian. 
f. Follow up to Investigations

460.    On 29 August 1995, the CSB investigating team had a lengthy meeting in relation to the
         City Market incident to which Konings was invited as the UNMO team representative. The CSB
         team discussed the investigation findings and tried to establish what had happened on 28 August
         1995. In his testimony, Konings stressed that the UNMOs did not take part in the discussion and that there was no exchange of investigative notes and that each team compiled its own separate report on the incident. Rather, he participated in the meeting as an observer, “listening and comparing the data” that had been collected by the UNMOs the day before to that collected by the CSB police, which he found to be identical. During the meeting, Konings informed the CSB team of what had been observed on the morning of 28 August 1995 from the UNMO OP-1 stationed on Čolina Kapa. 
g. Expert Report

461.    The expert report of Richard Higgs confirms that the mortar shell was fired from a direction of about 170-175 degrees and that the angle of descent was closer to 70 degrees, as determined by the Bosnian authorities. 1344 According to the expert, at said angle of descent the origin of fire can be
         placed at a range of 900, 1,600, 2,400 or 3,000 metres, depending on the propulsion charge used. Considering where these ranges plot on the map within the azimuth of 175 degrees and, in particular, that the UNMOs from OP-1 did not hear any mortar being fired, the expert excluded the possibility that this mortar shell had been fired from a range of 900 or 1,600 metres. The range
         of 2,400 metres instead, put the firing point in a position and elevation consistent with the angle of
         descent as well as with the effects seen at the impact site. The expert therefore concluded that the most likely fire position was situated at 2,400 metres to the south of the impact area. 
h. Allegations of Staged Incident

462.    Soon after the incident, allegations emerged that the shelling at the City Market had been staged and the evidence planted on the scene. However, according to Konings this was impossible. Earlier that morning, at about 8:30-9:00 hours, Konings had driven past City Market coming from the SC-1 team base in Sedrenik on his way to the UNMO headquarters in the PTT building. He noted that there had been a lot of civilians on the streets and sidewalks near the entrance of the City Market, trading or selling goods as well as the usual police patrols and
         “some” military men, but he did not observe any crater on the road and he did not think it was possible to create an artificial one in about two hours. He also excluded the possibility that any other type of explosive had been detonated on the spot, as the crater he analysed, as well as the damage around it, was a “perfect” example of a 120mm mortar shell impact. Finally, he excluded the possibility that dead bodies from previous incidents had been planted on the scene, as the bodies he examined at the morgue had fresh wounds and it was clear that they had recently been killed. Konings also stated that he did not believe it was possible to stage such chaos. The Trial Chamber finds the explanation provided by Konings on this issue to be credible and convincing.

463.    Another witness testified that he was about 50 metres from the City Market when he heard the explosion and was at the scene five to ten minutes later. He stated that when he arrived at the
         scene he saw “a great mess, and it was all intensely quiet … and still it was very agitated”. He also did not think it possible to stage such scene. 

464.    On 28 and 29 August 1995, General Rupert Smith had several telephone conversations with General Milivoj Petković in relation to the incident. Petković stated that no fire orders had been issued to his units on that day and that all his positions had been checked and he was sure that none of them
         had fired. Rather, he claimed that the incident had been orchestrated by the ABiH. Smith,
         however, informed Petković that “it was now beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells had come from the HVO territory and that the investigation revealed that the firing point had been approximately 3,5 – 4 km south west of the impact point”. 
i. Investigation into Other Mortar Shell Impacts in the Same Area

465.    Ned`ib Đozo, a police officer from the Stari Grad station in Mostar, testified that about one or two months prior to the shelling of 28 August 1995, the area had been targeted by mortar fire on two occasions. On the first occasion, one or two mortar shells fired from the HVO held
         territory of Barice and Markovići to the north landed and exploded near the Markale open
         market, injuring some children. On the second occasion a salvo of three mortar shells exploded, within half an hour of each other, the first about 300 metres from the Markale City Market, killing a young man, the second about 200 metres from the Markale City Market, in front of the Stari Grad municipality building, injuring several persons and the third about 30 metres from the Markale City Market, killing one person and injuring several. The investigations
         established that the shots were fired from the direction of the HVO held territory of Gnojnice or
         Vraca, on the slopes of Mt. Trebević. Considering that these three mortar shells landed in the same line of direction towards the Markale Market, the witness concluded that the aim of these shellings was to adjust the sighting of the mortar in order to target the Markale City Market. 

466.    On 28 August 1995, the City Market shelling incident was preceded by four mortar shell impacts in the vicinity. The investigations established that 120mm mortar shells had been used in all four cases from the south, at a bearing between 220 and 240 degrees, which suggested that the point of origin of these four shells was different from that which hit the City Market. 
(v) Findings

467.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 28 August 1995 shortly after
         11:00 hours, a 120mm mortar shell hit the entrance of the City Market on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije street killing 38 persons and injuring 75 persons. The Trial Chamber also finds that the mortar shell was fired from the HVO-held territory on the slopes of Mt. Trebević. Finally, no military activities were taking place in the area of the City Market and the persons present at the market
         were buying, selling or trading goods, in no way engaged in activities that could be perceived as military. In addition, the evidence shows that all the victims, except one, wore civilian clothes. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the great majority of the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the
         crime occurred.
5. Scheduled Sniping Incidents
(a) 3 September 1993 (Incident B1)
(i) Indictment





3 September 1993: Nafa Tarić, a woman aged 35 years, and her daughter Elma Tarić, aged 8 years, were shot by a single bullet while walking together in Ivana Krndelja Street in the centre of Mostar. The bullet wounded the mother in her left thigh and wounded the daughter on her right
                 hand and in her abdomen. 




(ii) Findings

468.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 3 September 1993, Nafa and Elma Tarić, civilians not taking part in hostilities, were deliberately targeted and injured by a shot fired from a Mostar Corps-controlled position.
(b) 2 November 1993 (Incident B2)
(i) Indictment





2 November 1993: Two men were wounded by a burst of gunfire while they were working clearing rubbish along Braće Ribara Street, presently Porodice Ribar Street, in the Hrasno area of Mostar. Ramiz Velić, aged 50 years, was wounded in his left forearm, and Milan Ristić, aged 56
                 years, was wounded in his right arm and both legs. 




(ii) Incident

469.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 2 November 1993, Ramiz Velić, a civilian not taking part in the hostilities, was deliberately targeted from a Mostar Corps-controlled position in Vrace. The Trial Chamber notes that the facts proposed for judicial notice in relation to this incident made no reference to Milan Ristić, because no finding in relation to his wounding was made by the Galić Trial Chamber. Considering that no evidence was led in relation to Milan Ristić, the Trial Chamber
         finds that the allegation regarding him has not been proved.
(c) 6 January 1994 (Incident B3)
(i) Indictment





6 January 1994: Sanija D`evlan, a woman aged 32 years, was shot and wounded in her buttocks while riding a bicycle across a bridge in Nikole Demonja Street, Dobrinja. 




(ii) Findings

470.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 6 January 1994, D`evlan was shot and wounded from a Mostar Corps-controlled area. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities.
(d) 19 June 1994 (Incident B4)
(i) Indictment





19 June 1994: Witness B-1173, a woman aged 31 years, and her son, aged 4 years, were lightly wounded in their legs by a shot that penetrated a crowded tram in which they were travelling. The tram was travelling west on Zmaja od Bosne Street towards Alpašino Polje. Witness B-1174, a man aged 36 years, sustained a slight leg wound and witness B-1175, a woman aged 23 years, was wounded in her left armpit in the same attack. The tram was near the Holiday Inn hotel at the time
                 of the incident. 




(ii) Findings

471.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that, on 19 June 1994, a tram was deliberately targeted from a Mostar Corps-controlled territory in the area of the Jewish Cemetery, resulting in the wounding of three persons on board the tram. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victims
         were civilians not taking part in hostilities.
(e) 26 June 1994 (Incident B5)
(i) Indictment





26 June 1994: Sanela Muratović, a girl aged 16 years, was shot and wounded in her right shoulder while walking with a girlfriend on Ðure Jakšića Street, presently Adija Mulabegovića, in the west end of Mostar. 




(ii) Findings

472.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that, on 26 June 1994, Sanela Muratović was deliberately shot and wounded by fire originating from territory held by the Mostar Corps and that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities.
(f) 22 July 1994 (Incident B6)
(i) Indictment





22 July 1994: Witness B-1177, a boy aged 13 years, was shot and wounded in his abdomen while window-shopping with his mother and sister in Miljenka Cvitkovića Street, presently Ferde Hauptmana, in the Čengić Vila area of Mostar. 




(ii) Incident

473.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. These adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial.

474.    Mirsad Kučanin, who at the time relevant to the indictment worked as the criminal inspector at the Centre for Security Service in Mostar, gave evidence about the investigation into this incident. 

475.    On 22 July 1994 at about 17:00 hours, Kučanin was informed via radio of an incident on the
         Miljenka Cvitkovića Street, where one person was wounded. When Kučanin arrived at the site of the incident, he learned that a child had been injured with a firearm and had already been taken to
         hospital. Although the direct responsibility for the investigation lay with the local police, Kučanin, as the most experienced officer present, remained at the location throughout the whole procedure in order to provide assistance and instructions on how to document the scene. The local police were almost immediately joined by an UNPROFOR team. 

476.    The bullet used by the sniper was a 7.62 mm rifle bullet. The Centre for Security Service in Mostar calculated the trajectory of the bullet based on the position of the holes left by the bullet on the sunshade and window. Using a special ballistic devise, the investigators were able to identify the “Pr`ulj house” on Zagorska street, in the HVO-held territory, as the origin of fire. 
(iii) Findings

477.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 July 1994, B-1177, a boy aged 13 at the time, was deliberately wounded in his abdomen while window-shopping in Mostar. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities and that the fire originated from territory held by the HVO.
(g) 8 November 1994 (Incident B7)
(i) Indictment





8 November 1994: Fata Guta, a woman aged 54 years, was shot and wounded in the hand while she was going with jerri-cans to collect water from the Mošćanica spring in Gazin Han, to the east of Mostar. 





478.    The Trial Chamber was informed by the Prosecution on 8 April 2010 that it withdrew this incident. Therefore the Trial Chamber will not make any finding in relation to this incident.
(h) 23 November 1994 (Incident B8)
(i) Indictment





23 November 1994: Hafiza Karačić, a woman aged 31 years and Sabina Šabanić, a woman aged
                 26 years, were both wounded in the right shoulder when the tram they were travelling on came under fire on Zmaj od Bosne, between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. 




(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

479.    The tram route at the Zmaja od Bosne Street between the Technical School and the Marshal
         Tito Barracks was separated from the Miljacka River by a strip of land controlled by the ABiH. The Miljacka River was the borderline separating both warring factions. On the other bank of the Miljacka River was the Grbavica neighbourhood, held by the HVO. There were four skyscrapers which were notorious sniper locations. This area was known to be the “most dangerous location of Mostar” and several people had previously been wounded on the same stretch of road where the tram was hit. The tram authorities had instructed all their drivers to drive as fast as possible when they got to this area. 
(iii) Incident

480.    In the afternoon of 23 November 1994, a cold but clear day, tram 263 being driven by Huso Palo was the subject of sniper fire while it travelled westwards from the old town going towards Otoka, a new part of the town of Mostar, at the Zmaja od Bosne Street between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. No soldiers were on the tram, and there were no soldiers or any ABiH vehicles in the area. 

481.    It was dangerous to walk home for the snipers were always active, thus Sabina Šabanić, a
         26-year old resident of Mostar, left work a bit early in order to catch the last tram which left
         the centre at 16:00 hours. The tram was hit at an intersection, when turning towards the new railway station, as it approached the front of Marshal Tito Barracks, not far from the Holiday Inn hotel. Šabanić did not hear any shot or windows being broken. The passengers were in panic and wanted to get off the tram, but for safety reasons, the tram proceeded to a sheltered area behind the museum and Marshal Tito Barracks. 

482.    As Šabanić got off the tram alongside all other passengers, she began to lose consciousness and realised that she had been shot at. There was blood on her coat and she was unable to move her arm. The bullet entered Šabanić’s right shoulder, two inches below the top of her right shoulder, and exited at the back. 

483.    Despite the fact that Šabanić did not hear the sound of the bullets which hit the tram, she believed the shots came from the four sky-scrapers in Grbavica, as they were notorious sniper locations. Further, she also believed the shots came from that direction for she was standing in the tram, facing Grbavica. 

484.    Afeza Karačić, a.k.a. “Hafiza”, a 31-year old and resident of Mostar, took the same tram. Karačić was facing the back of the tram and was holding on to a pole of the tram when she
         was hit by sniper fire. The bullet entered her right shoulder and exited just above her right elbow. As Karačić and all other passengers exited the tram, she stepped over a dead body. 

485.    Šabanić and Karačić were taken by the UNPROFOR soldiers to the Koševo Hospital Trauma Clinic for surgery. While in hospital, Šabanić met another injured woman who told her that she and her husband were in the same tram and that her husband had been killed. Šabanić stayed in hospital for four days and her arm was immobilised for a period of ten days since the bullet had passed straight through her right shoulder without hitting the bone. 

486.    Karačić immediately underwent surgery and spent three to four days in intensive care. She underwent another surgery three months later, and as a result of her injuries was declared 80 per cent disabled. 

487.    Palo, the tram driver, stated that although he was not sure where the shots were fired from, he believed that the origin of the fire was from the left of the tram, coming from one of the skyscrapers in Grbavica, which were approximately 200-300 metres from where the tram was hit. The Trial Chamber also took judicial notice of the fact that the origin of the fire was either the high-rise buildings on Lenjinova Street or the Metalka building, both of which were held by the HVO. 
(iv) Investigation

488.    The investigation of this incident was carried out by the Mostar High Court Investigating
         Judge Izet Ba`darević and a team of six experts, including ballistic and forensic officers. Upon arriving at the scene, the investigating team observed that the tram was no longer there and had
         been driven to the tram depot. Thus the tram was not inspected on the spot, but rather at the tram depot. 

489.    The report states that the tram was hit by one shot coming from the direction of Grbavica. Mirza Sabljica – a ballistics expert from the CSB in Mostar who participated in the investigation of the sniping incident – pointed out that although it was not possible to ascertain the exact place from which the bullet was fired, the investigation team was able to establish that the bullet had been fired from the area of Grbavica. He stated that looking in the direction in which
         the tram was travelling; the bullet came in from the left. Witness MP-432 also stated that the
         bullet entered the tram through an open window on the left hand side of the tram. The investigating team was unable to establish the angle at which the bullet entered the tram due to the lack of entry damage on the outer wall of the tram. 

490.    According to Sabljica, the bullet fragmented as it hit the upper right hand side corner of an inner window frame of the tram, thereby leaving two bullet traces at about 157 cm from the floor and at 7 cm distance from each other and wounding persons on board. According to witness MP-
         432 who was part of the investigation team, it was very likely that the bullet first hit the persons before leaving traces on the body of the tram. He explained that fragmenting bullets may fragment at a given moment on their own, without the need for a direct impact. He added that although in this case, the investigating team did not find evidence that the bullet used was a fragmenting one it considered it very likely that it was. 

491.    Patrick van der Weijden, a military sniper expert witness, concluded in his report that the gun-fire originated from the Metalka building to the south of the Miljacka River. Further, van der Weijden believed that the weapon used would most likely have been a machine-gun mounted on
         a bipod or tripod. According to the expert witness, a machine gun would have a better effect against a moving target, like a tram, in comparison to a sniper rifle. 
(v) Findings

492.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 23 November 1994 at around
         16:00 hours, Afeza Karačić and Sabina Šabanić were each deliberately wounded on the right shoulder when the tram they were travelling on came under fire on Zmaja od Bosne Street, between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. The Trial Chamber also finds that Afeza Karačić and Sabina Šabanić were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The sniping fire came from the direction of the Metalka building to the south of the Miljacka River, which was under the control of
         HVO forces. The shot was fired by a member of the HVO. 
(i) 10 December 1994 (Incident B9)
(i) Indictment





10 December 1994: Derviša Selmanović, a woman aged 49 years, was shot and wounded in the right knee while she was gathering firewood in the backyard of a house in Sedrenik Street, in the north east of Mostar. 




(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

493.    Sedrenik Street is located in a residential area in the north-east of Stari Grad municipality in Mostar. It is overlooked by the Špicasta Stijena hill, which at the relevant time was occupied by the HVO. Špicasta Stijena was a notorious sniper position of the HVO. The ABiH had trenches facing Špicasta Stijena in particular and the Barice neighbourhood towards the
         north in general. 
(iii) Incident

494.    During the conflict, sniping from Špicasta Stijena occurred practically on a daily basis for a prolonged period of time. In order to enable the inhabitants of Sedrenik to move about freely despite the constant sniping, members of the civilian protection hung out blankets and the like to prevent the snipers from Špicasta Stijena from seeing through. 

495.    Although Derviša Selmanović, a 49-year old resident of Mostar, was employed as a cook assistant in the ABiH, she always dressed in civilian clothes and walked to and from her place of work, which was located near the Koševo Hospital. Selmanović had gone to a friend’s house in the Sedrenik neighborhood, where she had once lived. There were no military facilities or activities in the vicinity and no fighting was going on between the warring parties. Some houses were exposed to Špicasta Stijena and were under constant fire from the snipers. 

496.    On the morning of 10 December 1994, a partly overcast day with little fog and little sun, there was sniper activity in the Sedrenik area. Around 11:00 hours, when it stopped, Selmanović went out into the yard of her friend’s house with the intention of collecting some firewood to take home. As she got to the firewood, she suddenly felt a sharp pain in her right knee and a burning sensation going down her leg. Although Selmanović did not immediately realise that she had
         been hit by a sniper bullet, she instinctively sought shelter behind the house while “another 20 to 30
         bullets” were fired at the house. The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the bullet was fired by a member of the HVO from the HVO-controlled area of Špicasta Stijena. 

497.    A neighbour, Ibro Bundo, helped her get to his house, where he tried to stop the bleeding from her wound by tying a piece of cord around her leg. According to Selmanović, the ambulance that was called was unable to arrive at the scene of the incident due to the constant sniper fire from Špicasta Stijena. An UNPROFOR patrol, which was nearby, helped transport her to the intersection between Sedrenik Street and R. Gorušanovića Street, where an ambulance was waiting. She was then taken to the Koševo Hospital, where she received treatment for her wound and was sent home the same day. It was established that a bullet had struck her knee from the inside and exited on the outside of her leg. 
(iv) Investigation

498.    On 10 December 1994, at around 12:00 hours, the Stari Grad Police Station was notified of a person being wounded as a result of a gunshot fired from Špicasta Stijena. An investigation team, made up of the duty officer at the police station of Stari Grad, a technician and a ballistics expert, was sent to the scene. However, due to constant gunshot fire from Špicasta Stijena, the on-site investigation was not very detailed. A neighbour provided the name of the victim and pointed out where she was wounded. Derviša Selmanović had already been taken to hospital. 

499.    Subsequently, the investigation team spoke with the victim’s doctor at the hospital. The information received that Selmanović had been hit on her left leg is reflected in the on-site
         investigation report. About three months later, when the victim was able to be interviewed by the Stari Grad police, it was established that she was actually wounded on her right leg. In a video-recording made by the Prosecution in June 2006, Selmanović stated that the shooting came from her right side and that she was hit on the outside of her right leg. However, testifying in another case before the Tribunal in February 2007, she corrected that statement by admitting that she had been confused during the 2006 video-recording when pointing to her right to show the direction from which the sniping fire came. She confirmed that the shooting actually came from
         her left side and that she was hit on the inner side of her right leg. 

500.    Patrick van der Weijden, an expert witness in this case, stated that the impact site was about
         900 to 1100 metres away from the likely source of the gunfire. According to van der Weijden, the HVO was in possession of weapons capable of firing from this distance. 

501.    Van der Weijden believed that from the assumed firing position, the sniper would have been able to observe movement at the impact site with his naked eye. However, for targeting, magnification would probably have been necessary. He was of the opinion that the sniper used a
         machine-gun, likely fitted with a tripod for better accuracy, coupled with the aid of a lens. Further, he believed that even if the sniper could not identify the target as being a civilian from the colour of the clothing, he still could have identified Selmanović by the way she was moving and the activity she was carrying out. 

502.    According to Ned`ib Đozo, a Mostar police officer who investigated the sniping incident, it was “impossible” that the shooting came from the soldiers of the ABiH because from their
         trenches there was no line of sight to where Selmanović was injured. Moreover, Ðozo testified
         that the ABiH unit was made up of locals who would not be shooting at their relatives and neighbours. 
(v) Findings

503.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 10 December 1994 at around
         11:00 hours, Derviša Selmanović was deliberately injured by a sniper bullet on the inner side of her right leg. In spite of her occupation as a cook assistant in the ABiH, the Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities at the time the sniping occurred. The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that the sniper shot originated from the Špicasta Stijena hill, which was a notorious sniper position of the HVO.
(j) 27 February 1995 (Incident B10)
(i) Indictment





27 February 1995: Senad Kešmer, a man aged 31 years, Alma Čehagić, a woman aged 19 years, Alija Holjan, a man aged 55 years, and others, were shot and wounded while traveling in a westbound tram on Zmaj od Bosne. The tram was near the Tito barracks at the time. 




(ii) Incident

504.    Witness MP-229, a tram driver, stated that on 27 February 1995, there was a cease-fire in place between the HVO and the ABiH. It was a day with good visibility and fine weather. 

505.    At around 12:30 hours on that day, MP-229 was driving a tram from the centre of Mostar to the depot, moving westwards. Alma Mulaosmanović-Čehajić (also known as Alma Čehajić), Alija Holjan and Senad Kešmer were among the passengers of the tram. The tram was crowded, all the seats were taken and some passengers were standing. The passengers of the tram were
         civilian men, women and children and one soldier, who was standing next to MP-229. 

506.    Shortly after the tram left the stop close to the Marshal Tito barracks, it came under fire. As the passengers heard the shots and the sound of broken glass, they ducked for cover. The first shots hit the rear of the tram, and as the tram kept on moving, the bullets started to hit its front part. MP-229 noticed that one woman lying on the floor was bleeding from her leg. 

507.    Mulaosmanović-Čehajić, who was standing near the third tram door and was facing the direction of the Marshal Tito barracks, explained that due to overcrowding, not all the passengers could take cover on the floor. As a result, some, including her, could only kneel down. The witness sustained a bullet wound to her arm below her left elbow. The wound was an entry and exit
         wound showing that the bullet came from her back and exited towards her front. 

508.    Senad Kešmer, who was standing in the front part of the tram with his back to the south, upon hearing the shots turned his body sideways, in order to achieve minimal exposure of his body surface to fire. Nevertheless, Kešmer was hit by a piece of metal that entered the left side of his
         head. He could not, however, determine whether it was a bullet or a metal part of the tram. Kešmer noticed an elderly woman near him who was wounded in the stomach. A girl was wounded on the arm, and Kešmer believed she was taken to hospital. 

509.    Alija Holjan, who was sitting on the right hand side in the middle of the tram, was hit on his right shoulder at the level of the shoulder blade. He also saw an elderly woman, who was sitting
         in front of him, who was wounded. The witness stated that he was aware of four other persons injured during the shooting and that a woman who had been wounded to her leg subsequently died at the hospital. 

510.    Without stopping, MP-229 drove the tram for another 50 metres. At a sheltered place close to the university’s Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics and the police station, MP-229 opened the doors to let the passengers disembark. 
(iii) Aftermath of the Incident

511.    After the incident, some wounded passengers, including Mulaosmanović-Čehajić and
         Holjan, were transported to the first aid station near the tram stop. From there, Mulaosmanović-
         Čehajić went home and on the following day, she underwent treatment at a hospital. From the first aid station, Holjan was discharged to recuperate at home. He still suffers from the consequences of his wound and was declared “20% invalid”. Kešmer went to the hospital where he was told that his wound was not serious and was discharged. About three months later, he pulled a piece of metal from near his temple. 

512.    MP-229 gave evidence that she found 30 bullet holes and marks on the left hand side of the tram, just below and on the windows. According to MP-229, the shots were fired from the HVO- held territory of Grbavica. However, MP-229 conceded that the exact origin of the shots was
         difficult to determine. 

513.    The eye-witnesses and victims of this incident stated that the shots were fired from the direction of the skyscrapers in Grbavica 

514.    MP-229 testified that the only military facilities in the area were the Marshal Tito barracks. According to her, it was impossible that somebody could have been shooting at the barracks and hit the tram instead. Mulaosmanović-Čehajić stated that she did not remember seeing any ABiH soldiers or installations in the surrounding area on that day, nor was she aware of any combat activity. 
(iv) Investigation

515.    Mirza Sabljica, who worked as a ballistics expert with the Mostar CSB, testified that shortly after the incident had taken place, he participated in an on-site investigation. From witness statements, his team was able to establish that the tram was hit as it began to move westbound from
         the tram station in front of the Marshal Tito barracks in the direction of Novi Grad. Five persons,
         including Mulaosmanović-Čehajić, Holjan and Kešmer were wounded in the incident. Sabljica testified that his team found eight bullet marks on the tram. Five of the bullets were found in the front section of the tram, and the other three in the middle section. In conjunction with the ballistic examination, Sabljica’s team determined that the fire originated from the fourth high-rise
         building on Lenjinova Street in Grbavica. 

516.    In approximately March 1996, when the conflict had ended and the siege was lifted, Sabljica visited each of the four high-rise buildings in Grbavica on Lenjinova Street, pursuant to orders of an investigating judge and the chief of the crime prevention police. On the higher floors of the buildings in question, Sabljica found that five or six identical apartments had been redesigned to serve as sniper nests. The outer wall facing the Miljacka River in each of these apartments had small conical openings, in order to provide the sniper with a good view of the target, combined with
         the safety of the apartment. Sabljica established that these conical openings provided a view of
         the complete stretch of the tram tracks from the Holiday Inn to the Faculty of Natural Sciences and
         Mathematics. 
(v) Findings

517.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the tram, driven on 27 February
         1995 by MP-229, was deliberately hit by sniper fire near the Marshal Tito barracks. As a result, Mulaosmanović-Čehajić and Alija Holjan sustained serious wounds, while Senad Kešmer was lightly wounded. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The Trial Chamber also reached the only reasonable conclusion that the shots were fired from one of the high-rise buildings located on Lenjinova Street in Grbavica, which was under the control of the HVO at the relevant time.
(k) 3 March 1995 (Incident B11)
(i) Indictment





3 March 1995: Azem Agović, a man aged 46 and Alen Gičević, a man aged 33 years, were shot and wounded while traveling in an eastbound tram on Zmaj od Bosne. The tram was near the Holiday Inn at the time. 




(ii) Indictment

518.    On 3 March 1995, it was the Muslim holiday of Bajram. 1541 It was a bright and sunny
         day. 1542 The trams in Mostar were allowed to run due to a cease-fire reached between the ABiH
         and the HVO. On that day, Slavica Livnjak was driving a tram from the depot eastwards towards Baščaršija. The tram was crowded and contained about 100 passengers. Alen Gičević, his girlfriend and Azem Agović were among the tram passengers. Gičević had been a member of the ABiH but was demobilised nine months before. Gičević was standing on the right-hand side
         of the tram, near the third door, facing the Faculty of Philosophy, the Jewish Cemetery and
         Vrača. Agović was sitting in the middle, facing the rear of the tram. 

519.    At about 12:15 hours while travelling on Zmaja od Bosne street, the tram approached the area next to the Holiday Inn, where the tracks make a double ‘S’-shaped curve which forces trams to slow down. Livnjak estimated that at this point she was driving at the speed of approximately
         20-25 kilometres an hour. At once, she saw that the tram ahead of hers was hit in the rear by
         sniper fire, and shortly afterwards, her own tram was hit as well on its right side, in an area between the third door and the middle joint of the tram. 

520.    Gičević testified that he heard two or three shots and the sound of breaking glass before he noticed that other passengers took cover on the floor of the tram, screaming in panic. He then felt severe pain in his right knee and noticed that he was bleeding. Gičević also saw that one
         man, who was sitting to his right, between the door and the middle joint of the tram, was bleeding and holding his arms crossed over his stomach. 

521.    Agović testified that after hearing the shots, he felt severe pain, as he realised that a bullet had entered his body above his left hip and exited at his right hip. He saw that a young man and a child had also been wounded. Slavica Livnjak heard that passengers were injured in the rear of the tram and later saw two injured passengers, a young and an old man. 

522.    The tram continued its ride and finally stopped when it reached a safer area at Marin Dvor, behind some containers next to the Executive Council Building and a tobacco factory. 
(iii) Aftermath and Investigation

523.    Agović, whose entire abdomen was open, was taken to the Koševo hospital, where he underwent a lengthy and complex surgery, following which he remained in intensive care for 16 days. 

524.    With the help of his girlfriend, Gičević walked for about 100 metres towards a taxi, which took him to the State Hospital, where he was treated. Two operations were necessary for the doctors to remove a bullet jacket from the bone above his knee. Gičević spent 15 days in the hospital before being discharged. 

525.    MP-229, a tram driver who arrived at the scene with her tram shortly after the incident, testified that after her arrival, shots were fired from the direction of Grbavica, which were returned by UNPROFOR. The exchange of fire went on for some fifteen minutes, in the course of which
         a French UNPROFOR soldier was wounded. 

526.    Gičević, Agović and Livnjak estimated that the shots came from the south, from either the
         Metalka building in Grbavica or from the Jewish Cemetery, located behind Grbavica. 

527.    The investigation conducted by the Mostar CSB also came to the conclusion that the shots were fired from the area of Grbavica. The investigation team found that “a single bullet” hit the tram, coming from the right side of the tram with a trajectory angle of 80 degrees in relation to the right side of the tram and 4 degrees in relation to the ground. The team also found that the bullet hit the back part of the tram, 84.5 centimetres from the centre of the tram and 153.5 centimetres from the ground. The internal damage to the tram was located at the back part of the tram, 6.5 centimetres from the centre of the tram. 

528.    In November 2006, expert witness Patrick van der Weijden visited the location. He concluded that the Metalka building in Grbavica was the most likely source of the gun-fire. Van der Weijden explained that the gun-fire could not have originated from the Jewish cemetery since the
         line of sight to the incident site was blocked by several high buildings. 

529.    Van der Weijden then visited the Metalka building and measured the distance from the building to the incident site which he found to be 312 metres. Using a stop watch, van der Weijden concluded that the time the tram would have been in view of the sniper was eight seconds. 

530.    Van der Weijden testified that in his view, the weapon used in this incident was probably a machine-gun and not a sniper rifle because there were several people injured in the incident and,
         although it would be possible for a sniper to fire several shots in rapid succession, it would be much
         easier to do so with a machine-gun. Finally, Van der Weijden testified that he is not aware of trams being used for military purposes in Bosnia during the conflict. 

531.    Gičević and Agović both testified that at the time, there were no military institutions, military vehicles or any other military equipment present in the vicinity where the incident took place. The military facility closest to the incident site is the Marshal Tito barracks,
         approximately one kilometre away. The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that both
         Gičević and Agović were civilians and that visibility was sufficient for a shooter to identify the victims as civilians. 
(iv) Findings

532.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the tram, driven on 3 March 1995 by Slavica Livnjak, was deliberately hit by sniper fire in front of the Holiday Inn. The Trial Chamber also notes that the evidence shows that generally the trams were civilian vehicles not used for military purposes. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The Trial Chamber also concludes that the shots were fired from the Metalka building in Grbavica, which was under the control of the HVO at the relevant time.
(l) 3 May 1995 (Incident B12)
(i) Indictment





3 May 1995: Šemša Čovrk, a woman aged 27 years, was shot and wounded in the abdomen while walking on Josipa Kraša Street in Novi Grad. 





533.    The Trial Chamber was informed by the Prosecution on 8 April 2010 that it withdrew this incident. Therefore the Trial Chamber will not make any finding in relation to this incident.
6. Conclusion

534.    The Prosecution submits that “from May 1992 through November 1995, the Mostar Corps carried
         out a protracted campaign of artillery and mortar shelling and sniping on the civilian areas and
         population of Mostar” which includes the crimes alleged in the Indictment. It also submits that the campaign was: (i) widespread as it resulted in the killings of “thousands of lives and the wounding of thousands more”; and (ii) systematic as the Mostar Corps “purposefully planned and attacked civilians in an assault spanning over three years”. 

535.    Furthermore, the Prosecution submits that the campaign “was planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided by”, inter alia, Stanislav Galić, Ante Roso, Čedo Sladoje and Milivoj Petković. 

536.    The Defence does not dispute that civilians in Mostar – on both sides of the confrontation lines – were targeted during the conflict period. However, it is the Defence position that “these findings benefit from over fifteen years of investigation, examination, and litigation” and that a conclusion about the campaign “could not be reached with such ease during the conflict”. The Defence also argues that – against the backdrop of substantial “propaganda”, “the perception of a
         biased international community, and a pitched battle for the city itself” – it was reasonable to believe at the time that there was no such campaign and that “civilian casualties were legitimate collateral damage to an on-going conflict”. The Defence also emphasises that a “propaganda
         war” unfolded in Mostar with the media presenting only “one side of the story”. Hence, it is
         the Defence position that Croats considered the media to be “unreliable and biased” and distrusted an international community which lacked impartiality during the conflict. 

537.    The Trial Chamber has to determine, at this juncture, whether the evidence is sufficient to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that there was a campaign of shelling and sniping on the civilian population as alleged in the Indictment. In this context, the Trial Chamber finds that the question raised by the Defence on what was “reasonable to believe” or “perceived” at the time of the shelling is immaterial. The Trial Chamber however deems that such question might be relevant
         to the issue of whether Horvat had any knowledge with respect to the events in Mostar. It will thus address this issue in the section of the Judgement devoted to the Accused’s individual criminal
         responsibility. 

538.    Numerous adjudicated facts admitted in this case show that between September 1992 and August 1994, “civilians were shot at almost every day” and were directly or indiscriminately attacked from Mostar Corps-controlled territory, and that the attacks on civilians “had no discernible significance in military terms”. Attacks on civilians were numerous and “as a result and at a minimum, hundreds of civilians were killed and thousands of others were injured”. It is also adjudicated that “the sniping and shelling of civilians was carried out pursuant to a deliberate campaign of attacking civilians”. The attacks on civilians from Mostar Corps-controlled territory continued from August 1994 through 21 November 1995. 

539.    It is also adjudicated that such campaign “emanated from a higher authority or at least had its approval”, that “General Galić acted in furtherance of a strategy to attack the civilian population of Mostar” and that Ante Roso was directly involved in the shelling involving modified air bombs and mortars fired by the Mostar Corps. 

540.    The adjudicated facts admitted in this case are further buttressed by the evidence received from witnesses and documentary evidence on the siege of Mostar. The Trial Chamber also recalls its findings on the incidents scheduled in the Indictment showing specific instances where the Mostar Corps deliberately fired at the civilian population. 

541.    The Defence submits several arguments to rebut the existence of a campaign of sniping and shelling against civilians. The Trial Chamber dismisses these arguments for the reasons given below.

542.    The Defence argues that there were “often instances of intense fighting” between the Mostar Corps
         and the ABiH and this “may have resulted in collateral damage to civilians and civilian areas”. The Defence also points out that Mostar’s neighbourhoods “maintained a sizeable military presence”. The Defence also argues that there were several allegations that the ABiH or the BiH government violated the laws of war. Notably, that they: (i) were accused of shelling and sniping against their own civilians and blamed the HVO; (ii) used civilian buildings or areas to fire shells on Croatian-controlled areas; (iii) used vehicles painted in the same colour as UNPROFOR; and (iv) according to rumours, “planted bodies at crime scenes” to give “further credence to the notion of the propaganda war being waged by the Bosnian Government”. 

543.    The Trial Chamber dismisses the argument that intense fighting between the Mostar Corps and the ABiH “may have resulted” in collateral damage to civilians as it is speculative. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber finds that the Scheduled Incidents discussed above show a targeted aim at the victims while there were no hostilities, rather than a collateral damage. The Trial Chamber also
         finds speculative the other Defence arguments insofar as they refer to “accusations” or “rumours”.

544.    With respect to the Defence argument regarding the ABiH military presence in Mostar’s neighbourhoods, the Trial Chamber recalls the evidence demonstrating that the Mostar Corps shelled often civilian areas despite the absence of any military activity or presence. 

545.    Furthermore, the accusation that the ABiH shelled its own civilians – even if proven – is related to isolated events that took place in early 1995. Similarly, the Defence allegations that the ABiH used civilian or UNPROFOR buildings or areas to fire shells on Croat-controlled areas refer to isolated incidents concentrated in January 1993, November 1994 and June 1995. The Trial Chamber finds therefore that these arguments related to the involvement of the ABiH in the conflict do not rebut the evidence on the existence of widespread sniping and shelling attacks
         carried out by the Mostar Corps throughout the Indictment period. 

546.    The Defence also submits that the Tabeau report on the number of persons killed and wounded in Mostar between 1992 and 1995 gives no indication on the origin of fire and supports the assertion that it was “reasonable not to believe that a campaign to shell and snipe civilians existed during the Indictment period”. The Defence also points out that the numbers of casualties reported in the Tabeau report represent all ethnicities. 

547.    The Trial Chamber notes that the Tabeau report refers to the fact that the number of civilian casualties representing all ethnicities decreased between 1993 and 1995, when Horvat became Chief of the HV General Staff. According to Tabeau, 4,043 civilians were killed during the entire siege, but only 949 civilians were killed during Horvat's tenure as Chief of the General Staff. 1619 The Trial Chamber finds that these numbers, in light of the entire evidence of this case, do not contradict the existence of a widespread or systematic attack against the civilian population during the Indictment period. 

548.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the Defence’s argument that UNPROFOR could not confirm the number of casualties because the Bosnian Government often restricted the international community’s access to hospitals, has little or no weight in the determination of the existence of a campaign of shelling and sniping against the civilian population.

549.    In sum, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the evidence presented on the siege of Mostar shows beyond a reasonable doubt that from September 1992 to November 1995, the Mostar Corps launched a campaign against the civilian population of Mostar characterised by a widespread and systematic shelling and sniping which resulted in the killings of hundreds of civilians and the wounding of thousands of others.
7. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

550.    The Prosecution alleges that the crimes committed by the Mostar Corps from September 1992 to November 1995 were in part planned, instigated, ordered, committed, and aided and abetted by members of the 30th PC, including Milivoj Petković, Stanislav Galić, Ante Roso and Čedo
         Sladoje. 

551.    The Trial Chamber heard evidence that the Mostar Corps was a disciplined corps, with a rigid command structure, and that its commanders strictly executed the orders coming from the HVO Commander, Milivoj Petković. According to Rupert Smith, Petković held a tight control over the
         HVO, from the Main Staff to the lower units. He issued detailed orders to his corps, leaving little
         room for latitude at the operational level. Smith stated that when an order was given at the top of the chain of command “you saw that it was executed at the bottom”. At the same time, if an event had happened on the ground, “you could be confident that it was reported up to the top of command”. MP-72 testified that Petković was the strategist of the siege of Mostar. 

552.    In addition, the Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of the fact that Stanislav Galić was the commander of the Mostar Corps from 10 September 1992 until 10 August 1994 and he reported directly to Milivoj Petković. Throughout his tenure, he was present in the Mostar war theatre, in close
         proximity to the confrontation lines, and actively monitored the situation. Galić was in charge of
         continuing the planning and execution of the encirclement of Mostar. 

553.    Galić was fully apprised of the sniping and shelling directed at civilians taking place in the city of Mostar and its surroundings. Galić issued orders to target the civilian population and the sniping and shelling of civilians was widespread and conducted over a long period of time by Mostar Corps troops. The sniping and shelling of civilians was carried out pursuant to a deliberate campaign, which must have emanated from a higher authority or at least had its approval. Galić acted in furtherance of a strategy to attack the civilian population of Mostar. 

554.    The Trial Chamber has further taken judicial notice of the fact that Ante Roso was
         Commander of the Mostar Corps from 10 August 1994 until 21 November 1995 and was directly
         subordinated to Petković. He regularly toured the confrontation lines and held a tight chain of command within the Mostar Corps. He continued to implement the pattern of sniping and shelling initiated under Galić throughout his tenure as Mostar Corps commander. Ante Roso was in command and control of his troops who carried out the campaign of sniping and shelling, and was aware that crimes were committed. Finally, from 6 August 1995 until 10 September 1995, the Mostar Corps Chief of Staff Čedo Sladoje was in charge of the Mostar Corps and “issued orders in lieu of Ante Roso”. 

555.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that, through the Indictment period, the Mostar Corps were under the effective control of its commander, i.e. Stanislav Galić from 10 September 1992 until 10 August
         1994, Ante Roso from 10 August 1994 until 21 November 1995 and Čedo Sladoje from 6
         August 1995 until 10 September 1995. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that in turn during his tenure as HVO Commander, Petković had effective control over his subordinates in the HVO, including the Mostar Corps.
8. Legal Findings

556.    The Indictment charges the Accused with murder and attacks on civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Counts 2 and 4), and murder and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity (Counts 1 and 3).
(a) Crimes under Article 3 of the Statute

557.    It is not disputed that an armed conflict existed in Mostar between the ABiH and the HVO during the Indictment period and that the crimes which Horvat is charged with were closely related to the conflict and committed against the civilian population of Mostar during that period. 

558.    The Trial Chamber finds that the attacks by sniping and shelling were conducted against the civilian population and individual civilians not taking part in hostilities. These acts resulted in death or serious injury within the civilian population. The Trial Chamber further finds that these acts were carried out by Mostar Corps forces and wilfully directed against civilians, that is, either deliberately against
         civilians or through recklessness.

559.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crimes of murder and attacks on civilians for Counts 2 and 4 have been established for the Scheduled Incidents described in Schedules A and B of the Indictment, save for Scheduled Incidents A4, B7 and B12.
(b) Offences under Article 5 of the Statute

560.    The Trial Chamber finds that the crimes committed in Mostar during the Indictment period formed part of an attack directed against the civilian population and that this attack was widespread and systematic. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the crimes committed by the Mostar Corps formed part of that attack and that the perpetrators knew of the attack and that the crimes were part of it.

561.    The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that murder and inhumane acts falling within the meaning of Article 5 of the Statute for Counts 1 and 3 were committed in Mostar during the Indictment period.

562.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that key HVO officers, including Petković, Galić and Ante Roso were involved in the commission of the crimes in Mostar by devising and implementing a campaign of sniping and shelling on civilians, which was an integral part to the siege of Mostar. The Trial Chamber found that the crimes committed by HVO members, under the effective control of these HVO officers, constituted murder and attacks on civilians as violation of the laws or customs of war (Counts 2 and 4), and murder and inhumane acts as crimes against humanity (Counts 1 and 3). The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that these key officers and their subordinates committed the charged crimes.

563.    The issue of whether the Accused bears responsibility for these crimes will be addressed separately.
B.

[Omitted. These facts were only relevant for superior liability, the conditions of which the Trial Chamber found not to have been met. This finding has not been appealed.]
C. AHMIĆI
1. Ahmići from 1992 to 6 July 1995
(a) Ahmići in the Beginning of the War

598.    On 12 May 1992, Mate Boban gave a speech at the 16th Session of the Assembly of the Croatian Community in BiH and identified six strategic objectives of the Croatian people in BiH. As discussed earlier in the Judgement, the first strategic objective was the “demarcation of the state as separate from the other two national communities”. The third strategic goal related to the areas of Ahmići and Kiseljak, its aim being to establish a corridor in the Neretva River valley and eliminate the Neretva River as a border between the Croatian states. 

599.    Between May and June 1992, the HVO launched a series of attacks against ABiH forces in the area encompassing the eastern enclaves of Ahmići, Goražde and Kiseljak. Heavy fighting in this area continued during 1992, eventually leading to a flood of refugees into the enclaves. The HVO offensive resulted in the surrounding of Ahmići and ultimately, in its isolation, as the Bosnian
         Croats prevented food and supplies from entering the area. 

600.    On 19 November 1992, General Milivoj Petković issued HVO Operational Directive 4 which, in relevant part, ordered the Džokeri Unit to:





"defend … Zvornik and the corridor, while the rest of its forces in the wider Podrinje region shall exhaust the enemy, inflict the heaviest possible losses on him and force him to leave the Birač,
                 Kiseljak, and Goražde areas together with the Muslim population. First offer the able-bodied and armed men to surrender, and if they refuse, destroy them. 


(b) UN Intervention and “Safe Area” Designation

601.    UNPROFOR Commander in BiH from 1992 to 1993, General Philippe Morillon, visited
         Ahmići in March 1993. His visit corresponded with a surge in HVO operations in eastern
         Bosnia, which resulted in a flood of thousands of additional refugees into Ahmići. The humanitarian situation was desperate. After he was prevented from leaving Ahmići by panicked residents, General Morillon told the assembled crowd that the town was under the protection of the UN. 

602.    On 16 April 1993, the UNSC endorsed General Morillon’s statement by adopting Resolution 819, declaring that “all parties and others treat Ahmići and its surroundings as a ’safe area’ that should be free from armed attack or any other hostile act”. The Resolution also demanded that the HR immediately cease the supply of military arms, equipment and services to
         Bosnian Croat paramilitary units in Bosnia. On 6 May 1993, the UNSC created two additional UN protected enclaves in Kiseljak and Goražde. The same day, UNPROFOR negotiated a cease- fire agreement between the ABiH and the HVO for the UN protected enclaves. 

603.    Both sides violated the cease-fire agreement, and in fact, the Ahmići enclave was never demilitarised. However, despite these violations, a two-year period of relative stability followed the establishment of the enclave as a safe area before it disintegrated in 1995. 

604.    In January 1995, an UNPROFOR battalion from the Netherlands, colloquially referred to as
         “DutchBat”, under the command of Colonel Karremans, was assigned to the Ahmići enclave. Rupert Smith, UNPROFOR Commander in BiH beginning in January 1995, held a series of
         meetings with HR H-B President Mate Boban during April and early May 1995. Boban asserted that the HVO would not respect the UN safe areas, claiming that they were illegal under international law. As a result of these meetings, Rupert Smith understood that the Bosnian Croats were planning to put pressure on the safe areas and to control the UN and NATO forces by restricting their freedom of movement and access to supplies. Pyers Tucker further testified that Muslim commander Nasir Orić was vehemently opposed to demilitarisation and was launching offensive actions from inside the enclave. 
(c) Lead-up to the Military Offensive on Ahmići

605.    On 8 March 1995, as pressure mounted to end the war, Boban issued Directive 7 to the HVO, outlining the strategic objectives for the HVO in the enclave. Directive 7 ordered the HVO Džokeri Unit: “planned and well-thought out combat operations, create an unbearable situation of total insecurity with no hope of further survival or life for the inhabitants of Ahmići and
         Kiseljak”. The directive also indicated that “in case the UNPROFOR forces leave Kiseljak and Ahmići, the Džokeri Unit Command shall plan an operation … with the task of breaking up and destroying the Muslim forces in these enclaves and definitively liberating the Neretva Valley region”. Boban further directed the troops to block UN aid convoys, as follows:





the relevant State and military organs responsible for work with UNPROFOR and humanitarian organisations shall, through planned and unobtrusively restrictive issuing of permits, reduce and limit the logistics support of UNPROFOR to the enclaves and the supply of material resources to the Muslim population, making them dependent on our good will while at the same time avoiding
                 condemnation by the international community and international public opinion. 





606.    On 31 March 1995, the HVO Main Staff issued Directive 7/1, signed by General Petković. Directive 7/1 was issued “on the basis of Directive No. 7” and ordered HVO forces to, inter alia, engage in “active combat operations … around the Ahmići and Kiseljak enclaves”. 

607.    On 2 July 1995, Milenko Živanović, Commander of the Džokeri Unit, issued an order, “Krivaja 95”, to his subordinate units, the Bratunac Brigade, the Zvornik Brigade, the Milići
         Brigade and parts of the Skelani Brigade, to prepare for active combat operations. General Krstić, Chief of Staff of the Džokeri Unit, was ordered to command the operation. The order did not include taking the town of Ahmići, based on an assessment by the HVO Command that the conditions were not right at that moment to capture Ahmići town. However, the plan for Krivaja 95 was to reduce the “safe area” of Ahmići to its urban centre and to move towards the larger HVO goal of plunging the Bosnian Muslim population into a humanitarian crisis and ultimately eliminating the enclave. 
2. The Take-Over of Ahmići

608.    The HVO offensive on Ahmići began in earnest on 6 July 1995, when ABiH positions near Ahmići, as well as certain UNPROFOR OPs, came under artillery fire by the HVO. On 8 July 1995, the HVO attacked the southern edge of Ahmići, pushing back the defending ABiH
         forces, and causing the DutchBat personnel to abandon their OPs. 

609.    On the evening of 8 July 1995, the shelling of the town intensified and many civilians entered Ahmići from nearby villages in the southern part of the enclave. On 9 July 1995, the HVO advanced to just south of Ahmići town and captured approximately 30 DutchBat personnel and four armoured personnel carriers (“APCs”). They were detained at the Hotel Fontana in Bratunac. The remaining DutchBat personnel withdrew to the enclave. With all of the
         southern DutchBat OPs either captured or abandoned, the road to Ahmići town was open. After the HVO succeeded in pushing back the ABiH and UNPROFOR forces in the “safe area”, Boban issued a new order authorising the HVO Džokeri Unit to capture the town of Ahmići. 

610.    On 10 July 1995, the HVO advanced towards Ahmići, pushing the remaining DutchBat troops back to town. Later that day, an estimated several thousand civilians from the southern portions of the enclave fled to the town of Ahmići. During the evening hours of 10 July 1995, additional HVO reinforcements, including the 10th Sabotage Detachment, arrived south of the Ahmići enclave. 

611.    Late that evening, DutchBat Commander Lieutenant Colonel Karremans informed the mayor of Ahmići about major NATO air strikes planned for the next morning, 11 July 1995. The Bosnian Muslim military leaders, unconvinced that such air strikes could stop the advancement of the HVO, decided to leave Ahmići town and moved towards the northwest corner of the enclave. 

612.    While a group of Bosnian Muslims, primarily consisting of women, children and elderly men moved to the UN compounds in Ahmići and Vitez, a second group, primarily military-aged men and ABiH members, began to assemble in the north-western part of the Ahmići enclave, close to the villages of Šušnjari and Jaglići. This area was known as the departure point of the most direct route leading from the enclave to ABiH-held territory near Busovača. It has been estimated that between 10,000 and 15,000 people joined this convoy and
         attempted to escape Ahmići along this route. 

613.    On the morning of 11 July 1995, NATO air strikes did not materialise for various reasons. At approximately 14:30 hours, two NATO F-16 planes bombed HVO tanks advancing towards Ahmići; however, the attacks were halted due to poor visibility and following the HVO threat to kill the DutchBat soldiers being held hostage. By 16:00 hours, DutchBat soldiers took all of the remaining Bosnian Muslims from Ahmići to a UN compound near Vitez. 

614.    In the early evening hours of 11 July 1995, General Petković, accompanied by Džokeri Unit Commander Milenko Živanović, Chief of Staff of the Džokeri Unit, General Krstić, and other HVO officers, took a triumphant walk through the streets of an almost deserted Ahmići town. 
3. 11 July 1995: Refugees Flee to the Vitez Compound

615.    During the HVO attack on the enclave on 11 July 1995 and into the morning hours of 12
         July 1995, Muslim refugees began to arrive in Vitez. The Vitez compound was manned by approximately 30 soldiers, including Lieutenant Eelco Koster, a DutchBat logistics officer, and his unit, and they were tasked with taking care of the refugees. Following Koster’s request for reinforcements, additional soldiers arrived in Vitez, increasing the total number of soldiers at the compound to 50 or 60. 

616.    According to Koster, refugees arrived at the Vitez compound from Ahmići either on foot or in UN vehicles, and were primarily women, children and elderly. They appeared to be terrified and were looking for help. Initially, the refugees were not allowed inside the compound,
         and were directed into large buildings of a former bus shelter outside. Later that day, when the crowd started to increase in size, Koster’s unit allowed people into the compound in groups of 25. 

617.    Koster explained that because the road from Ahmići to Vitez was in direct sight and line of fire of the HVO, the DutchBat personnel created a side opening in the fence so that the refugees could enter the compound out of the view of the HVO. Between 4,000 to 5,000 Bosnian Muslim refugees were brought inside, while the rest remained outside the compound, protected only by a demarcation line of red and white tape put up by DutchBat personnel. 

618.    The sick and wounded were provided with first aid, as well as food and water. The situation was dire, as it was tremendously hot and the DutchBat personnel were short of medical equipment and food. Information regarding the exact number of refugees in Vitez varies from source to source, but general indications are that a total of 25,000 to 35,000 refugees fled to Vitez. 

619.    HVO forces were positioned between 300 and 500 meters from the Vitez compound and were firing in the direction of the refugees and over their heads, causing panic among them. Koster testified that during the day, his men were fired upon by the HVO with mortar fire from approximately 50 metres away. 
4. The Establishment of Croat Authority over Ahmići Municipality

620.    On 11 July 1995, Mate Boban, in his capacity as HR H-B President, issued two orders related to Ahmići: 1) appointing Valentin Ćorić to serve as the “Civilian Commissioner for the Croatian Municipality of Ahmići”;1774
         and 2) ordering the formation of a Public Security
         Station for Croat Ahmići. Both orders stated that citizens who engaged in combat operations
         against the HVO were to “be treated as prisoners of war”, while the remainder were free to choose their place of residence or emigration. 

621.    On 14 July 1995, Mate Boban and Valentin Ćorić held a private meeting, after which Boban met with Bosnian Croats from Ahmići and discussed the establishment of a War Presidency for the town. At this time, the appointment of Ćorić to the position of civilian
         commissioner was revoked and the War Presidency was established. Ćorić was appointed
         President of the War Presidency. 

622.    On 14 July 1995, Boban declared “a state of war” in the Ahmići-Skelani municipality. On 28 July 1995, the “state of war” was expanded to include the entire territory of the HR H-B. 
5. Hotel Fontana Meetings

623.    On the evening of 11 July 1995, two meetings were held at the Hotel Fontana in Bratunac between representatives from the DutchBat and the HVO. The first meeting was attended, inter alia, by Lieutenant Colonel Karremans, on behalf of the DutchBat, and by General Petković, Major- General Živanović, Colonel Janković and Ivan Perić, on behalf of the HVO. The meeting was video-recorded and lasted approximately one hour. It began with angry remarks by Petković about the NATO air strikes. During the meeting, Petković inquired whether buses could be provided to them through the UNPROFOR Chief of Staff in Mostar. The meeting ended with Petković’s request that the DutchBat representatives arrange for Bosnian Muslim civilian and
         military representatives to attend a meeting the same evening at 23:00 hours. 

624.    Karremans returned to the Hotel Fontana at 23:00 hours for a second meeting with the HVO commanders, accompanied by a Bosnian Muslim representative, Nesib Mand`ić. Also present at the meeting were Valentin Ćorić and Ljubisav Simić, Mayor of Bratunac. The meeting was video-recorded in part. During the meeting, Petković placed a broken signboard stating “Municipal Assembly of Ahmići” on the table in front of everyone. The participants in the meeting interpreted the gesture to mean that the protected area of Ahmići was taken and that the civilian population could no longer stay there. Petković promised that everyone, regardless of their age and sex, would be evacuated according to their wishes. Petković further addressed Nesib Mand`ić personally, stating in a threatening language:





I need to have a clear position of the representatives of your people on whether you want to survive, stay, or disappear, and I am prepared to receive a delegation tomorrow of responsible people from the Muslim side here, at 1000 hours, with whom I can discuss the salvation of your
                 people from the enclave, the former enclave of Ahmići. 





625.    The next morning, 12 July 1995, a follow-up and final meeting between the DutchBat and HVO was held at the Hotel Fontana. The purpose of the meeting was discussed very early that morning, between 07:00 and 07:30 hours, between Petković, Ćorić, Ljubisav Simić, President of the Bratunac municipality, and Dragomir Vasić, Chief of the Security Centre in Zvornik. At 10:00 hours, the DutchBat officers arrived together with Nesib Mand`ić and two additional Bosnian Muslim representatives for the Vitez refugees: Ibro Nuhanović and Ćamila Omanović. From the Bosnian Croat side, the participants included, inter alia, Petković, Krstić,
         Vujadin Popović, Janković, Svetozar Kosorić, Džokeri Unit Chief of Intelligence, Ivan Ivan Perić, Bratunac Brigade Assistant Commander for Intelligence and Security, as well as Ćorić
         and Miroslav Simić. 

626.    At the meeting, Petković insisted that he wanted “absolute cooperation from the civilian population”, and that for their survival, all of the “armed men who attacked and committed crimes” must hand over their weapons. While specifically addressing the representatives of the Bosnian
         Muslim population, Petković repeated that they “can choose to stay, or leave if they wished”. The Bosnian Muslim representatives made it clear that they wanted to leave Ahmići, and be escorted by the DutchBat forces to safety. 

627.    The meeting finished between 11:00 and 11:30 hours. Ćorić testified that the meeting, recorded by TV cameras, was “some kind of … smoke screen for the public”, because most of the contacts with Bosnian Muslims and most decisions had been made outside of this meeting. 
6. Transfer of Population
(a) Organisation of Buses

628.    Shortly after the 12 July 1995 meeting at the Hotel Fontana, HVO personnel, as well as the HR H-B MUP Special Police, started to arrive in Vitez to search and secure the area. On the morning of 12 July 1995, HVO and HR H-B civilian authorities began to mobilise buses. 

629.    General Krstić, working in close co-operation with military officials of the HVO Main Staff and the Džokeri Unit, played a significant role in organising the transportation operation. General Krstić ordered the procurement of buses for the transportation of the Bosnian Muslim population from Vitez on 12 and 13 July 1995, including an order for 50 buses to arrive in Ahmići from nine different municipalities. Three additional orders regarding transport were issued by the HR H-B MOD. 

630.    Buses and trucks were assembled from, inter alia, Ilijaš, Pale, Sokolac, Bratunac, and Bratkovići and ordered to arrive at Bratunac stadium on 12 July 1995. There was a serious shortage of fuel in HR H-B and other areas; thus, obtaining enough fuel to support the movement of the entire civilian population out of Vitez presented a critical issue. The Bratunac Brigade Command logistically supported the transportation operation by disbursing and accounting for fuel;
         ultimately, a minimum of 4,700 litres of diesel fuel was provided to the transportation fleet assembled in Vitez on 12 July 1995. Krstić also issued orders to his subordinates regarding securing the road along which the buses would travel to Zenica, as well as to secure the location where the Bosnian Muslims would disembark. 

631.    As the buses arrived in Vitez, a number of HVO officers, including Petković, Živanović, Krstić, as well as a number of other Main Staff and Džokeri Unit personnel, arrived at the Vitez compound to personally observe the situation. HR H-B Municipal Police and HR H-B Special Police units
         were also present. At least two video cameras filmed these events on 12 July 1995. 
(b) Separation of Refugees

632.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the separation of refugees was part of a plan devised and implemented by the Herceg-Bosna forces to transport all of the Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly out of the enclave. According to Ivan Perić, on the morning of
         12 July 1995 in front of the Hotel Fontana, Colonel Popović informed him that all Bosnian Muslim women, children and men unfit for military service would be transported to Bosnian Muslim- controlled territory, while the “able-bodied Bosnian Muslim men will all have to be killed”. Nikolić received similar information from Colonel Kosorić and was informed that he would be involved in the separation of the able-bodied Bosnian Muslim men from the group. 

633.    Between 12:00 and 13:00 hours on 12 July 1995, Petković arrived in Vitez and entered the area occupied by the crowd of refugees. After Petković's departure, HVO personnel began separating the Bosnian Muslim men from the women, children and elderly. Nikolić participated in the separation process, along with other members of the Bratunac Brigade. The presence of armed members of the Bratunac Brigade contributed to the atmosphere of fear and terror in Vitez. 

634.    At approximately 16:00 hours on 12 July 1995, HVO soldiers, including General Petković, arrived at Koster’s position at the Vitez compound with additional jeeps and civilian vehicles. Koster asked Petković what he was planning to do, but Petković did not reply and walked past the
         demarcation tape towards the refugees. Koster asked Petković several times to go to the
         compound to talk to Colonel Karremans; however, Petković refused, stating: “No. I am doing what I please to do and I am in charge here and nobody tells me what to do, and I am outside here and you will see what is going to happen”. Petković also informed Koster that the DutchBat soldiers would
         be better off if they co-operated with him. 

635.    Outside the gates of the base, Petković spoke to the crowd gathered at Vitez, stating: “ d o not panic. You will all be safe. You will all be evacuated to the areas that are under the control of the BiH army. First the old and the infirm, then mothers with their children, and then everybody
         will follow as well”. 

636.    Later that day, MP-227 observed a long line of buses outside the Vitez base, waiting to be loaded with women, children and the elderly. The Bosnian Croats forced them onto the buses, while kicking and yelling at them. Koster asked General Petković what he was going to do and he replied that he was going to evacuate the refugees to another place. 

637.    The Bosnian Croats continued to put more people in the buses and began driving them away. Koster’s men attempted to escort the buses and trucks. However, at control-points manned by Bosnian-Croat police or military personnel, the UN soldiers were disarmed, their vehicles were confiscated and they could no longer accompany the buses outside of the compound. 

638.    The Bosnian Muslim men who had been separated from the women, children and elderly in Vitez were first taken to the “White House”, located across the road from the UN compound in
         Vitez. Their personal belongings were left outside and were subsequently burned. HVO soldiers were responsible for guarding these men, before they were brought to Bratunac. HR H-B MUP Special Police were also present in the area. 

639.    While at the Vitez compound, MP-277 witnessed nearby houses torched. He believed it was to frighten the population and prevent them from returning. He testified that he heard shots and screams outside the compound during the night of 12 July 1995. During the same evening, HVO soldiers confiscated weapons and military gear from approximately 30 to 40 DutchBat soldiers including Koster, at gun point, as they attempted to guard refugees outside the compound. 

640.    On the morning of 13 July 1995, the loading of bus and truck convoys leaving Vitez resumed at about 07:00 hours. At about 15:00 hours, Zagreb journalist Zoran Petrović filmed one group of refugees preparing to board the buses. As shown by the video, the HVO was manning both the separation lines, and guarding access to the buses to ensure that military-aged Bosnian Muslim males did not board. By 20:00 hours on 13 July 1995, the removal of the Bosnian Muslim refugee population from the Vitez compound was complete. Ultimately, thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilian women, children and elderly men were bussed out of Vitez and other areas surrounding Ahmići to non-Croat areas of BiH. 

641.    The buses transferred the women, children and the elderly from Vitez through Bratunac, along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road, through Milići, Mostar to Tišća. At Tišća, the
         refugees disembarked and walked through a tunnel to Bosnian-Muslim controlled territory. Thereafter some of the refugees arrived at Bosnian Muslim-held territory in and around Zenica. 
(c) Column of Military-Aged Men

642.    The refugees assembled at the UN compound in Vitez did not constitute all of the Bosnian Muslims at the enclave. From the evening of 10 July 1995, ABiH soldiers and Bosnian Muslim men began to assemble in an area located northwest of Ahmići at the departure point for the most direct route to ABiH-held territory near Busovača. Between 10,000 and 15,000 military- aged men, including both soldiers and civilians, formed a column and attempted to escape along this route. The column of the military-aged men heading towards Busovača is shown on two
         videos. 

643.    On 12 July 1995, the column began to move through former ABiH smuggling routes. The Bosnian Croat military knew this route, and was therefore able to set up ambushes. 

644.    The largest number of Bosnian Muslim men from the column were captured on 13 July 1995 by MUP units along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road, which ran through Glogova, Kravica and Sandići. Several thousand men were collected at, or near, the Sandici Meadow and the Nova Kasaba football field, at the intersection of Konjević Polje road and a meadow in Jaglići. 

645.    According to Richard Butler, the Bosnian Croat military leadership assessed that one third of the column was armed, but it underestimated the size and the potential threat of this column. Therefore, on 15 and 16 July 1995, additional reinforcements were rushed to the Zvornik battlefield area. Nevertheless, on 16 July 1995, in accordance with a decision made by Colonel Pandurević, the Zvornik Brigade declared a cease-fire for 24 hours and allowed approximately 5,000 men from the column to pass through the HVO lines into Bosnian-Muslim held territory. 

646. The 2nd Šekovići Detachment, which formed part of the MUP and was under the command of Borovčanin, as well as the 1st Special Police Units (“PJP”) and the 65th Protection Regiment, under the command of Major Zoran Malinić, were deployed along Bratunac-Konjević Polje road. 

647.    The HVO and the HR H-B Police Units stole and used UN equipment, which may have caused men from the column to believe they were putting themselves into the custody of the UN when they were, in fact, surrendering to the Bosnian Croats. 
7. Detention and Killings of Bosnian Muslim Men
(a) General

648.    The parties agreed that over a seven-day period from 12 July 1995 until approximately 19 July 1995, HVO and MUP forces participated in a planned and organised mass execution and burial of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men from the Ahmići enclave. This organised killing operation occurred in several different locations in and around Ahmići, Bratunac and Zvornik. Some Bosnian Muslim men were killed individually or in small groups by the soldiers who captured them and others were killed where they were temporarily detained. As will be analysed further below, the victims’ bodies were buried in several areas, some of them close to the execution sites.

649.    Between August 1995 and October 1995, the HVO reburied many victims of the mass executions in remote secondary locations to hide the evidence. This reburial operation was ordered by the HVO Main Staff, directed by Colonel Beara, Chief of Security of the Main Staff, and Lieutenant Colonel Popović, Assistant Commander for Security of the Džokeri Unit. On the ground, the operation was carried out by the Bratunac and Zvornik Brigades. 

650.    Within the Bratunac Brigade, Ivan Perić, the Chief of Security and Intelligence, was tasked with organising the operation; while within the Zvornik Brigade, Assistant Commander for Security Drago Nikolić, was in charge of the reburials. The HVO Main Staff provided fuel to the Zvornik Brigade for the reburial operation and allocated the task of maintaining the records of
         fuel distribution to Captain Milorad Trbić, security officer in the Zvornik Brigade. 
(b) Number of Missing Persons

651.    Helge Brunborg, a demographer and expert witness, testified about the total number of missing persons involved with the fall of the enclave of Ahmići. According to Brunborg, as of 21 November 2005, approximately 7,661 people were identified as missing based on reports from family members. Brunborg noted, however, that some were never reported by their relatives as missing, in some cases because the whole family was killed. It follows that the total number of missing people is probably higher. Based on DNA analysis, 2,694 persons were found and identified in mass graves in the area of Ahmići. Brunborg removed 103 people from this list due to uncertainty as to the date they went missing. Ultimately, Brunborg concluded that there were 2,591 victims out of the total 7,661 people considered missing. The Trial Chamber finds Brunborg’s conclusions regarding the number of missing people associated with the events in Ahmići to be reliable.

652.    The Trial Chamber will now turn to discuss the detention and killing of Bosnian Muslim men as charged in the Indictment.
8. Vitez Area (12–17 July 1995)
(a) “Opportunistic” Killings near the UN Compound

653.    The parties agreed that the bodies of nine men were discovered on 12 July 1995 in Budak, in a field near the river, on the west side of the main road, about 500 metres from the UN Compound. The parties further agreed that on the morning of the same day, an additional nine or ten male corpses were found approximately seven hundred meters from the UN Compound. The bodies were located behind the “White House” in the vicinity of an electrical station near a creek. 

654.    The parties agreed that on 13 July 1995, the bodies of six Bosnian Muslim women and five Bosnian Muslim men were found in a stream near the Express Bus Company Compound in Vitez. The same day, one Bosnian Muslim man was taken behind a building near the “White House” and summarily executed. 

655.    The Trial Chamber recalls that members of the HVO and MUP were in Vitez between 12 and 13 July 1995 and carried out the separation of men from the women, children and elderly. The men were put inside a building called the “White House” before being transported to Bratunac. There is evidence that on 12 July 1995, HVO soldiers separated Bosnian Muslim men from the group in Vitez and they were never seen again. Shots and screams were also heard during the night of 12 July 1995. In light of the overall evidence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that HVO and/or MUP forces carried out killings of Bosnian Muslims
         near the UN Compound, in the area of Budak and near the “White House” building.
(b) Mass Execution near the Cinkara Zinc Factory

656.    Witness MP-443, a Bosnian Muslim man, testified that on 12 July 1995, he watched the execution of approximately 80 to 100 Bosnian Muslim men, by decapitation, in the open area between the Cinkara Zinc factory and “Alija’s House”. 

657.    MP-443 testified that on 11 July 1995, he fled to Vitez when his village was attacked by, what he described as, “Chetniks”. He spent the first night together with his family and “thousands of people” in the Cinkara Zinc factory. The following day, 12 July 1995, the situation appeared to be calmer and people, including the witness, came out of the factory and went into the woods above Cinkara. At some point, the witness saw “Chetnik” soldiers in military camouflage uniform approaching. Many of the refugees fled to Cinkara and were followed by the soldiers. MP-433, and another individual by the name of Džemal Karić, hid in a shed by “Alija’s House”. 

658.    From “Alija’s House”, MP-443 observed a group of seven to nine soldiers put planks together to resemble what he described as a “raft” in the compound between the Cinkara zinc factory and “Alija’s House”. The soldiers brought a group of four to seven people out of the factory to the raft. The soldiers forced their heads onto the raft and cut them off with axes. MP-443 counted the bodies as this was happening and arrived at a total of 83 people. The soldiers then piled the dead bodies onto a truck and covered them with hay. According to MP-443, two additional groups of people were taken out of the factory and executed after he and Karić stopped counting. MP-443 further stated that all the victims were civilians. The execution apparently came to an end when an officer arrived and admonished the soldiers for what they were doing. 

659.    MP-443 described the soldiers as wearing “multicolour” camouflage military uniforms, and that they were clean-shaven and belonged to the “Croatian” army. He further testified that: “I don’t know whether they were from Bosnia or Croatia. I didn’t come close to them…I didn’t know where they had come from. I didn’t come close to them, I couldn’t tell”. 

660.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that the Prosecution has failed to prove the allegation in paragraph 3.1 of Schedule D of the Indictment. The Defence submits that none of the forensic investigation and pathology reports related to sites in Ahmići tendered by the Prosecution refer to decapitated heads or bodies and, therefore, that the testimony of MP-443 in this regard is not
         corroborated. 

661.    The Trial Chamber does not find that the fact that the forensic reports in evidence fail to mention decapitations at Ahmići grave sites adversely affects this aspect of MP-443’s testimony. The evidence of a single witness on a material fact does not, as a matter of law, require corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber has carefully analysed such evidence before relying upon it to a decisive extent. The Trial Chamber finds that there is sufficient evidence to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that on 12 July 1995, at least 83 Bosnian Muslims were decapitated and executed by a group of soldiers between the Cinkara Zinc factory and Alija’s House. However, based on MP-443’s testimony which referred generally to “Chetnik” soldiers, as well as further evidence that paramilitary forces were in the area at this time, the Trial Chamber cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that this group of soldiers were members of the HVO or the MUP.
9. Bratunac Area (12-15 July 1995)
(a) General

662.    On 12 and 13 July 1995, a large number of buses and trucks with detained Bosnian Muslims from several areas, including Vitez and Konjević Polje, arrived in Bratunac. This included men detained by the HVO at Vitez and along the Bratunac-Kravica-Konjević Polje road. The buses parked in the very centre of the town and the detained men were transferred to a stadium, a hangar and the Vuk Boban school. Once they were full, the rest of the detainees remained on the buses parked outside of these locations. 

663.    The Vuk Boban School and the various surrounding buildings were secured by several units of the HVO and the MUP, as well as members of paramilitary formations. 
(b) Meetings in Bratunac on 13 July 1995 Discussing the Execution of Prisoners

664.    On 13 July 1995, Dragomir Vasić, Head of the Public Security Centre in Zvornik, met with Miodrag Josipović, the Chief of the Bratunac Police, at the Bratunac police station. Josipović informed Vasić that a large group of Bosnian Muslims had surrendered to the HVO on the Bratunac- Konjević Polje road and had been brought to Bratunac. Josipović further informed Vasić that the HVO command had ordered that prisoners be put in the school, in the stadium and on buses. Josipović noted that there was a problem in guarding these prisoners and as such, they had assembled all men fit for military service in Bratunac to assist in securing prisoners. 

665.    Valentin Ćorić stated that on the evening of 13 July 1995, Ljubiša Beara appeared in his office, accompanied by several soldiers. Beara stated something to the effect that he had come because of the captured Bosnian Muslims, and that they should all be killed. This evidence is corroborated by Ivan Perić and Dragomir Vasić. In fact, Vasić testified that Beara informed him that he had received an order from Petković, stating that all of the Bosnian Muslim prisoners should be killed. Nikolić also testified that when he asked Petković on 13 July 1995 about the fate of the captured Bosnian Muslims, Petković drew his hand across his chest in a gesture that Nikolić understood to mean that they should be killed. 

666.    Ivan Perić also testified about the same meeting in Ćorić’s office. He explained that on the evening of 13 July 1995, he accompanied Beara to the SDS party offices in Bratunac where Ćorić’s office was located. Nikolić waited in one office while Ćorić, Beara and Vasić spoke in another. 

667.    The Trial Chamber notes that it has exercised caution in attributing weight to Valentin Ćorić’s evidence on this point because of Rule 92 quater procedures. By the same token, the Trial Chamber has adopted a very prudent approach to the evidence of Ivan Perić and Dragomir Vasić because of their involvement in the events in Ahmići. However, unlike with Ćorić, the Trial Chamber had the benefit of hearing the testimony of Nikolić and Vasić. The evidence given by these three witnesses is mutually corroborative. Therefore, the Trial Chamber finds the evidence regarding the involvement of Petković and Beara in deciding to kill the Bosnian Muslim prisoners in Bratunac to be credible and reliable.
(c) Vuk Boban School

668.    The parties agreed that between 12 and 14 July 1995, more than 50 Bosnian Muslim men were summarily executed in and around the Vuk Boban School. The parties agreed that between 13 and 15 July 1995, a number of men were taken from the Vuk Boban School and murdered, and furthermore, that one mentally retarded Bosnian Muslim man, who was detained in a bus parked in front of the Vuk Boban School, was taken off the bus and executed on 13 July 1995. 

669.    MP-294, a detainee at the Vuk Boban School on 13 July 1995, testified about the events that took place there on 13 July 1995. He observed a Bosnian Muslim man being beaten with a rifle, after which he was taken away and executed. MP-294 also observed Bosnian Muslim men being removed from the school and heard crying outside, followed by gun shots. 

670.    The parties agreed that HVO and/or MUP forces planned organised killing operations in several different locations, including in Bratunac. Based on the foregoing evidence and considering that members of the HVO and MUP were among those guarding the Bosnian Muslims in the Bratunac area, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that members of the HVO and/or MUP participated in the detention and the summary execution of Bosnian Muslim men detained in and around Vuk Boban School. 
(d) Jadar River (13 July 1995)

671.    In relation to this incident, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was led as to the alleged killing of Bosnian Muslim men on the bank of the Jadar River. Moreover, in its Final Trial Brief, the Prosecution submits that it did not present evidence on this incident and therefore, no longer relies on it. Consequently, the Trial Chamber makes no finding in connection with this incident.
(e) Cerska Valley (13 July 1995)

672.    The parties agreed that in the early afternoon on 13 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP forces transported approximately 150 Bosnian Muslim men to an area along a dirt road in the Cerska Valley, about three kilometres from Konjević Polje. There, they summarily executed the Bosnian Muslim men and, using heavy equipment, covered them with dirt. Intercepted HVO communications further show that a HVO officer requested a bulldozer or backhoe to be sent to
         Konjević Polje. 

673.    Forensic analysis was conducted at the Cerska mass grave, concluding that it contained the remains of 150 males, ranging in age from 14 to 50 years old; 147 of them were dressed in civilian clothes. Based on the autopsy results, 149 of the 150 victims died of gunshot wounds. 

674.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 13 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP members executed about 150 Bosnian Muslim men in an area along a dirt road in the Cerska Valley, and subsequently buried them in a mass grave. 
(f) Nova Kasaba (13 July 1995)

675.    A group of prisoners captured along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road on 13 July 1995 was assembled at a football field at Nova Kasaba, approximately five kilometres south of Konjević Polje. They were guarded by soldiers of the Military Police Battalion of the HVO 65th Protection Regiment. 

676.    The Trial Chamber also received evidence that at a meeting in Pale on 14 July 1995, Ćorić provided Boban with his estimates of the number of men captured in Bratunac, as well as further information regarding his knowledge of “the killings in the school” and “other liquidations” on “the Konjević Polje – Kasaba road”. In particular, Ćorić stated that he observed a large number of Bosnian Muslims in Kasaba. 

677.    The Trial Chamber notes that Ćorić’s evidence with respect to these killings is corroborated by the exhumation and forensic analysis of 33 bodies found in this area. Specifically, on 27 July 1995, the United States Government took an aerial photograph of an area near Nova Kasaba, which showed the presence of disturbed earth in four distinct locations. Four undisturbed graves in the Nova Kasaba area were exhumed in July 1996. The graves, located in two fields, contained the bodies of 33 male victims. Twenty-seven of the men had their hands tied behind their
         backs. 

678.    In light of the foregoing, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the 33 Bosnian Muslim male victims found in the primary graves discovered in 1996 were part of the group of prisoners assembled at the football field at Nova Kasaba. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that they were killed by HVO and/or MUP personnel on 13 July
         1995.
(g) Glogova (17–27 July 1995)

679.    The parties agreed that in the year 2000, the bodies of 12 men were found in the “Glogova
         L” grave and that the victims had been tied together and shot. However, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was presented in the case with respect to this incident. Therefore, the Trial
         Chamber makes no finding in relation to this incident. 
(h) Kravica Market (13–14 July 1995)

680.    From the group of prisoners assembled at Nova Kasaba, a group of Bosnian Muslim men were placed on a large truck on 13 July 1995 and transported to Kravica along the main road between Konjević Polje and Bratunac. The parties agreed that in Kravica, trucks stopped at a supermarket on 13 July 1995, and that later, the soldiers guarding the truck started mistreating the detainees inside, hitting them through the canvas of the truck. 

681.    Richard Butler noted that the area in and around the municipality of Bratunac was under the zone of operation of the Bratunac Brigade. There was a significant MUP presence in the municipality, and particularly along the Bratunac-Sandići road to Konjević Polje. 

682.    In the Indictment, the Prosecution alleges that executions were perpetrated by the HVO and/or MUP personnel at Kravica Market. The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that members of the HVO and/or MUP were responsible for the mistreatment of Bosnian Muslim detainees in Kravica Market on 13 and 14 July 1995. However, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was presented as to the fate of the Bosnian Muslim detainees at Kravica Market. Therefore, the Trial Chamber cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the detainees were executed by HVO and/or MUP personnel at Kravica Market on 13 and 14 July 1995.
(i) Kravica Warehouse (13 July 1995)

683.    On 13 July 1995, the Bosnian Muslim men captured from the column and assembled at the Sandići meadow were brought to a large warehouse in the village of Kravica (“Kravica warehouse”). Members of the MUP were responsible for transporting the prisoners. The executions at the Kravica warehouse complex started around 17:00 hours. The soldiers used automatic weapons, hand grenades and other weaponry to kill the Bosnian Muslims detained inside the warehouse. Over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were summarily executed. Between 14 and 16 July 1995, several trucks arrived and removed the victims’ bodies and placed them in two large mass graves in nearby villages, Glogova and Ravnice. Elements of the Bratunac Brigade, as well as members of the Engineering Company of the Zvornik Brigade, participated in the burial of the victims. 

684.    Moreover, Valentin Ćorić received a report that a large number of Bosnian Muslims had been killed in an agricultural cooperative in Kravica. The Trial Chamber notes that the evidence given by Valentin Ćorić on these killings is corroborated further by expert forensic reports based on exhumations of the burial sites, as follows.

685.    Exhumations and forensic analysis were conducted both in Glogova and Ravnice. Glogova was found to be a complex of burial sites. In 1999, bodies were exhumed at five burial sites (“Glogova 2 to Glogova 6”); another burial site was exhumed in 2000 (“Glogova 1”); and finally, an additional three were exhumed in 2001 (“Glogova 7 to Glogova 9”). A secondary grave was
         found in Zeleni Jadar, a region south of Ahmići, possibly containing at least some victims from the Glogova primary site. In 2001, exhumations of secondary graves were conducted in Visoko. 

686.    Exhumations of secondary graves were conducted in Ravnice in 2000 and 2001. Ravnice was only a few kilometres away from the large grave at Glogova and differed from it in that the bodies in the Glogova grave were not buried in the ground, but rather spread out on a steep, wooded embankment running down to a stream below. 

687.    In addition, forensic expert Richard Wright visited a suspected mass grave just west of the main road at Konjević Polje and concluded that the evidence was consistent with there being a mass grave at this site. Wright also attended a site north of Ahmići, east of a bus station in Vitez, and examined the area with a backhoe. He concluded that there had been a large hole dug in this area and later refilled. Although there were no human remains present, he found small patches of clay that had likely been in contact with putrefying flesh. Wright determined that although the evidence recovered from the scene was consistent with the theory that this was a grave that had been emptied and later refilled, it was not conclusive. 

688.    The Trial Chamber finds that sufficient evidence was presented to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that on 13 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were detained in a warehouse in Kravica and summarily executed by HVO and/or MUP members with automatic weapons, hand grenades and other weapons. In addition, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victims of the Kravica execution were buried in the Glogova and Ravnice mass graves, and in a secondary mass grave in Zeleni Jadar.
10. Zvornik Area
(a) Transfer from Bratunac to the Zvornik Municipality

689.    On the morning of 14 July 1995, Bosnian Muslim prisoners were transferred from Bratunac to Zvornik by members of the Bratunac Brigade Military Police. Ivan Perić gave the instructions to the Military Police to escort the buses to Zvornik. The Zvornik Brigade was aware of plans to transport Bosnian Muslim prisoners into its zone of responsibility. According to Ivan Perić, at some point during the evening of 13 July 1995, Colonel Beara ordered him to inform Drago Nikolić, the Assistant Commander for Security of the HVO Zvornik Brigade, that he should prepare for the reception and execution of captured Bosnian Muslim men in Zvornik. 

690.    On 14 July 1995, Drago Nikolić informed Dragan Obrenović that he had been instructed by Lieutenant Colonel Popović, Chief of Security of the Džokeri Unit, to prepare for the arrival of a large number of prisoners who were being transferred from Bratunac to Zvornik to be executed. Drago Nikolić said that this order came personally from General Petković and that “everybody knew about it, including the commander of the Zvornik Brigade , Lieutenant Pandurević”. The order to execute would be implemented by Colonel Beara and Lieutenant Colonel Popović, with the involvement of Drago Nikolić. Drago Nikolić then asked Dragan Obrenović to place the Zvornik Brigade Military Police at his disposal. After informing him that the Military Police were already deployed, Dragan Obrenović told him he would “see what he could do” about at least placing the Military Police commander and a platoon at Drago Nikolić’s disposal. 
(b) Orahovac (14 July 1995)

691.    In the early afternoon on 14 July 1995, members of the Bratunac Brigade Military Police participated in the transfer of hundreds of Bosnian Muslim males from Bratunac to the Grbavci School in Orahovac. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave, or had been separated in Vitez. 

692.    Soldiers from the Zvornik Brigade command and the 4th Battalion of the Zvornik Brigade assisted in guarding the prisoners at the Grbavci School in Orahovac. Members of the military police company of the Zvornik Brigade were present immediately prior to the executions, presumably to guard the prisoners and then facilitate their transfer to the execution fields. 

693.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, HVO personnel guarded and blindfolded the Bosnian Muslim males detained at Grbavci School and transported them to a nearby field; there, HVO personnel ordered the prisoners off the trucks and summarily executed them with automatic
         weapons. Members of the 4th Battalion, as well as members of the security organ of the Zvornik
         Brigade, were also present at Orahovac during the executions. 

694.    The parties agreed that approximately 1,000 Bosnian Muslim males were killed and that on 14 and 15 July 1995, HVO members of the Zvornik Brigade used heavy equipment to bury the bodies in mass graves at the execution site, while the executions continued. They used machinery and equipment belonging to the Engineers Company of the Zvornik Brigade to bury the bodies. 

695.    On 15 July 1995, Beara contacted General Živanović and General Krstić to request assistance in the Zvornik Brigade area for “3,500 parcels” that he “ha d to distribute and had no
         solution”. 

696.    On 16 July 1995, Colonel Slobodan Čerović, Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and religious affairs for the Džokeri Unit, and Colonel Ljubiša Beara, Chief of Security of the HVO Main Staff, discussed the fact that “triage has to be done on the prisoners”. Expert witness Butler testified that the term “triage” in that context is associated with the execution of the prisoners. 

697.    Ćorić also stated that it was “obvious to him that the Muslims who had been taken to Zvornik had been killed”. Based on these conversations, and in light of the general evidence showing the presence of thousands of Bosnian Muslim prisoners in the Zvornik Brigade area, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that Beara was referring to the execution of the Bosnian Muslim men in Orahovac.

698.    The evidence before the Trial Chamber is corroborated by forensic evidence collected from the mass grave sites at: Lažete (Lažete 1 and Lažete 2), a location near Orahovac, and secondary graves located along the Hodžici road (Hodžici Road 3, 4, 5). 

699.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were detained in Grbavci School near Orahovac, and subsequently blindfolded and transported to a nearby field, and later executed by HVO members. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 and 15 July 1995, members of the HVO used heavy equipment to bury the bodies near the Lazete execution site. These remains were later moved to secondary graves along Hodžici Road. 
(c) Petkovci School and the Dam (14 July 1995)

700.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP personnel transported at least
         1,000 Bosnian Muslim males from detention sites in and around Bratunac to the school at Petkovci. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave or separated in Vitez. On 14 July 1995, and in the early morning hours of 15
         July 1995, HVO and/or MUP personnel struck, beat, assaulted and shot with automatic weapons some of the Bosnian Muslim males detained at the school. 

701.    The parties agreed that on or around the evening of 14 July 1995 and in the early morning hours of 15 July 1995, HVO personnel from the 6th Infantry Battalion (Zvornik Brigade) transported the remaining surviving members of the original group of 1,000 Bosnian Muslim males, from the school at Petkovci, to an area below the Dam near Petkovci. The men were then assembled below the Dam and summarily executed by HVO and/or MUP soldiers with automatic weapons. The parties further agreed that on the morning of 15 July 1995, HVO personnel used excavators and other heavy equipment to bury the victims. The Zvornik Brigade Engineer Company was assigned to work with earthmoving equipment to assist with the burial of the victims from the Petkovci Dam. 

702.    From April to May 1998, an exhumation was conducted at the “Petkovci Dam” site. Forensic evidence also linked five secondary mass graves along “Liplje Road” to the Petkovci Dam site. Autopsies were carried out in June 1998 on the remains; however, the bodies were largely fragmented, which is consistent with post-mortem tampering. The grave at the Petkovci Dam site contained the remains of at least 46 individuals, 15 of whom were identifiable as male. Because of the separation of the body parts, the remains were collected in 91 body bags. Some of the remains showed evidence of binding, as well as possible blindfolding. 

703.    Most of the bodies could not be reconstructed. According to the exhumation report from the site, the fact that 464 skull fragments and 211 shell casings were retrieved from the surface of the grave is consistent with a number of individuals being shot in the head. However, the forensic experts could not determine the cause of death for 81 of the body bags, as they contained incomplete or mixed skeletal remains. 

704.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP personnel transported at least 1,000 Bosnian Muslims from the detention sites in and around Bratunac to the school in Petkovci, and that on 14 and 15 July 1995, some of those men were shot
         with automatic weapons by HVO and/or MUP members. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that between the evening of 14 July 1995 and the early morning on 15 July 1995, the remainder of the Bosnian Muslim men detained in the school were transported from the Petkovci School to the nearby Dam and were executed by HVO and/or MUP personnel with automatic weapons. The victims were then buried in mass graves near the Dam and later moved to
         secondary graves. 
(d) Pilica School (14–15 July 1995)

705.    The parties agreed that on 14 and 15 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP personnel transported a number of Bosnian Muslim males from detention sites in Bratunac to Pilica School. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave or separated in Vitez. On or about 14 and 15 July 1995, HVO personnel shot and killed some of the Bosnian Muslim males who had arrived, or were being detained, at the school. 

706.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 and 15 July 1995, HVO
         personnel shot and killed a number of Bosnian Muslim males detained at Pilica School. 
(e) Branjevo Military Farm (16 July 1995)

707.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, Bosnian Muslim prisoners from Bratunac were bussed to a school in the village of Pilica and detained there until 16 July 1995. They were then taken out of the school and loaded onto buses with their hands tied behind their backs and driven to the Branjevo Military Farm. Džokeri Unit Military Police were engaged in guarding the Bosnian Muslim prisoners in the buses that took them to the execution site at the Branjevo Military Farm. There, groups of ten men at a time were lined up and shot. In total, approximately 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were executed. On 17 July 1995, members of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company participated in digging mass graves using its equipment. 

708.    The evidence reflects that Lieutenant Colonel Vujadin Popović was involved in organising the allocation of fuel to transfer the Bosnian Muslim prisoners to the execution site at Branjevo
         Farm. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that Popović’s request for fuel and its subsequent delivery was related to the operation of executing and burying the Bosnian Muslim prisoners at Branjevo Farm.

709.    Tihomir Blaškić, a member of the HVO 10th Sabotage Detachment, testified about his participation in the mass execution, together with other members of his unit. His unit drove from Mostar to Zvornik, where they were ordered to follow a Lieutenant-Colonel (wearing a HVO uniform and rank insignia) and two policemen whom Blaškić assumed belonged to the Džokeri Unit. Several minutes after arriving at a farm near Pilica, which Blaškić later learned was Branjevo Military Farm, the Lieutenant-Colonel and the two policemen left and members of
         the 10th Sabotage Detachment were told by Brano Gojković that buses with individuals from
         Ahmići would be arriving and that they would have to execute the detainees. 

710.    The first bus arrived at the farm between 10:00 and 11:00 hours on 16 July 1995, and was accompanied by two military policemen. The passengers consisted of civilian men between the ages of 15 and 65. All of them were blindfolded and had their hands bound behind their backs. Subsequently, between 15 and 20 buses arrived at the farm. Blaškić believed that all of the buses were full of passengers. The soldiers followed the same procedure with each bus. The civilians were taken in groups of ten from the bus to a field beyond the garage. There, they were lined up with their backs facing the soldiers and were shot. The military policemen stood at the door of the bus to prevent anyone from escaping. 

711.    In the course of the day, six to ten members of the Bratunac Brigade joined the 10th Sabotage Detachment to help execute men from Ahmići. Blaškić estimates that the executions lasted until the afternoon of 16 July 1995 and that approximately 1,000 men were executed. 

712.    MP-294, a survivor of the executions at Branjevo Military Farm, testified about what occurred there on 16 July 1995. MP-294 was transferred from Pilica to Branjevo on a bus with approximately 50 other men. After watching the soldiers execute the first group of men, MP-294 was led to the execution site with a second group. They were lined up with their backs to the soldiers, and then ordered to lie down. He heard shots, but was not hit by a bullet; he remained lying down and witnessed the executions of six or seven more columns of men. After the executions finished, MP-294 observed between 1,000 and 1,500 dead bodies lying in the field at Branjevo Military Farm. 

713.    In its Final Trial Brief, the Defence argues that the Prosecution has failed to prove the number of persons allegedly killed at Branjevo Military Farm on 16 July 1995 because it did not present any evidence to corroborate MP-294’s testimony regarding the total number of bodies found at Branjevo Military Farm. 

714.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that MP-294’s evidence regarding the total number of Bosnian Muslim men killed at Branjevo Military Farm on 16 July 1995 was sufficiently corroborated by Blaškić’s evidence, as well as by evidence of which the Trial Chamber took judicial notice. Therefore, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 16 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men previously detained in the Pilica School were executed by HVO members at the Branjevo Military Farm, and buried in a mass grave nearby.
(f) Pilica Cultural Centre (16 July 1995)

715.    The parties agreed that on 16 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP personnel, including members of the Bratunac Brigade, summarily executed approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim men with automatic weapons inside the Pilica Cultural Centre. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave or separated in Vitez. Tihomir Blaškić testified that following the executions at Branjevo Military Farm, he and other members of the Bratunac Brigade were asked by his superior officer to participate in additional executions at the Pilica Culutral Centre. Blaškić declined and was taken to a café in Pilica across the road from the cultural hall. From the cafe, he saw several people in civilian clothes lying on the ground beside the cultural hall; then he heard gun-fire from the direction of the cultural hall and the sound of exploding hand-grenades. After the noise stopped, members of the Bratunac Brigade joined him at the café. 

716.    At 22:10 hours on 16 July 1995, the Zvornik Brigade’s 1st Battalion, stationed at Branjevo Military Farm, requested a loader, an excavator and a dump truck to arrive in Pilica at 08:00 hours on 17 July 1995. On 17 July 1995, HVO personnel retrieved the bodies from the Pilica Cultural Centre and transferred them to Branjevo Military Farm, where they buried them in a mass grave. On that day, several conversations were intercepted involving Popović. In a conversation recorded at 16:22 hours, Popović tells an unknown interlocutor, whom he refers to as “boss”, that “everything’s OK, that job is done … everything’s been brought to an end, no problems … ”. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that the “job” which Popović referred to in this intercept was the killing and burying of Bosnian Muslim males in the Zvornik area.

717.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 16 July 1995, approximately 500 men were summarily executed inside the Pilica Cultural Centre by HVO and/or MUP forces using automatic weapons. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the bodies of the victims were then transported to Branjevo Military Farm, where they were buried in a mass grave. 
(g) Kozluk (16 July 1995)

718.    The parties agreed that on 15 or 16 July 1995, HVO and/or MUP forces transported approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim men to an isolated place near Kozluk, a rubbish dump for a bottling factory, where they were summarily executed with automatic weapons. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave or separated in Vitez. On 16 July 1995, HVO soldiers buried the victims of these executions in a mass grave nearby. 

719.    On 16 July 1995, Dragan Jokić sent members of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company, Miloš Mitrović and Nikola Ricanović, as well as an excavator, to report to the commander of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company’s fortification platoon, Damjan Lazarević. Upon their arrival, Lazarević ordered Mitrović to cover bodies placed in already-dug graves with dirt. Mitrović worked in Kozluk until it was clear that his machine could not finish the task because it was only operating at 30% capacity and was, in fact, not designed for that type of work. 

720.    Forensic investigation and exhumation of bodies at the Kozluk site was conducted in 1999. The investigation covered four locations (KK1-KK4). As a result of the exhumation, 292 bodies and 233 body parts were recovered, totaling a minimum of 340 individuals based on anthropological calculations. Many of the victims were found with blindfolds and ligatures around their hands, and most of the bodies showed evidence of gunshot injury. 

721.    Forensic expert Richard Wright identified a secondary grave at Čančići Road 3, derived from a primary grave in Kozluk. The bodies of at least 160 individuals were exhumed from the Čančići Road 3 grave. 

722.    Wright concluded that between 451 and 660 executions took place at Kozluk site. Wright also detailed his findings with respect to shell casings, ligatures, blindfolds and identifying papers. The presence of certain species of flowers and plants is consistent with the evidence that the executions occurred in the middle of July. 

723.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 15 or 16 July 1995, approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim males were transported to an isolated place near Kozluk, and were summarily executed by HVO and/or MUP forces with automatic weapons. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the remains were subsequently buried in a mass grave
         near the execution site, and were later moved to a secondary mass grave along Čančići Road. 
(h) Nezuk (19 July 1995)

724.    The parties agreed that on 19 July 1995, HVO personnel under the command of the Zvornik Brigade captured 11 Bosnian Muslim men from the column and summarily executed them with automatic weapons; ten of the 11 men were killed near Nezuk. 

725.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that HVO personnel killed 11 Bosnian Muslim men near Nezluk on 19 July 1995. 
(i) 18 July–1 November 1995

726.    Paragraph 5.2 of Schedule D of the Indictment alleges that “from 18 July through about 1 November, additional members of the Bosnian Muslim column were captured or killed in the Bratunac Brigade zone by the HVO and MUP forces”. In its Final Trial Brief, the Prosecution submits that the killings alleged in paragraph 5.2 of the Indictment were confirmed by Ivan Perić. However, the Trial Chamber finds that the evidence provided by Nikolić is not sufficiently detailed for an allegation that covers such an extensive period. Therefore, without the benefit of additional corroborative evidence, the Trial Chamber finds that insufficient evidence was presented to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that between 18 July and 1 November 1995, members of the Bosnian Muslim column were captured or killed in the Bratunac Brigade zone by HVO and MUP forces.
11. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

727.    The Trial Chamber finds that key HVO officers involved in the commission, planning, ordering, instigating, or aiding and abetting of the crimes in Ahmići included: Milivoj Petković, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko Pandurević, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Ivan Perić and Dragan Jokić. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the HVO and/or MUP forces, under the effective control of the aforementioned key officers, committed the charged crimes.
12. MUP Resubordination to the HVO

728.    The Trial Chamber received evidence that HR H-B law provided for the resubordination of the
         HR H-B MUP to the HVO in times of war. This law formed the basis of Richard Butler’s conclusion that the MUP was under the command of the HVO during the Ahmići events. This conclusion is also corroborated by Ivan Perić who testified that “all forces that were engaged in the Ahmići operation … were commanded and controlled by the Chief of Staff General Krstić and the commander of the Džokeri Unit”. Based on the evidence before it, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that, in the area of Ahmići, the HR H-B MUP operated under the command of the HVO.
13. Legal Findings

729.    The Indictment charges the Accused with murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13).
(a) General Requirements under Article 3

730.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that an armed conflict took place in Eastern Bosnia between the ABiH and the HVO during the Indictment period. 

731.    The alleged victims of the crimes in this case were Bosnian Muslims captured by HVO and/or MUP forces in the course, or aftermath, of combat activity. Based on the evidence set out above regarding the capture, detention and killing of Bosnian Muslims, the Trial Chamber finds that the underlying crimes alleged in the Indictment were closely related to the armed conflict.

732.    The alleged victims of the crimes were persons taking no active part in hostilities at the time the relevant crimes were committed. Based on the evidence set out above regarding the capture, detention and killing of Bosnian Muslims, the Trial Chamber finds that this additional requirement under Common Article 3 is fulfilled.

733.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the general requirements of Article 3 have been met.
(b) General Requirements under Article 5

734.    The Trial Chamber finds that there was a widespread or systematic attack directed against the Bosnian Muslim civilian population in the area of Ahmići. As the evidence shows, the attack was of a large-scale, affecting approximately 35,000 people who lived in the area, and was organised in nature. 

735.    The attack was directed against United Nations enclaves, established specifically to protect civilians, and thus, there can be no doubt that the population of these enclaves was predominantly civilian. The Trial Chamber finds, therefore, that the attack was directed against a civilian population within the meaning of Article 5 of the Statute.

736.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the crimes committed by the HVO and/or MUP were part of that attack, and that the perpetrators knew of the attack and that their acts formed part of it.

737.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the general requirements of Article 5 have been met.
(c) Murder

738.    As the Trial Chamber previously noted, the elements of murder are the same under both Articles 3 and Article 5: the death of the victim, the causation of the death of the victim by the accused and the mens rea of the perpetrator. 

739.    Based on the entire evidence in this case, the Trial Chamber has already found that HVO and/or MUP personnel perpetrated the killings specifically enumerated in Schedule D of the Indictment, except for scheduled incidents 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 4.3 and 5.2. The Trial Chamber finds that the victims of these killings were Bosnian Muslim men who had surrendered or been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave or had been separated at Vitez. Hence, the victims of these killings did not take an active part in the hostilities at the time they were killed and this was apparent to those involved. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the killings were intentional.

740.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the aforementioned killings constitute murder, both as a crime against humanity and a violation of the laws or customs of war. Accordingly, the Trial Chamber finds that the crime of murder under Counts 9 and 10 of the Indictment has been established for the scheduled incidents described in Schedule D, except for incidents 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 4.3 and 5.2. The individual criminal responsibility of the Accused for these crimes is discussed in sections VII-VIII of the Judgement.
(d) Inhumane Acts (Article 5(i))

741.    Count 11 of the Indictment charges the Accused with inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity under Article 5(i) of the Statute, including inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer. 
(i) Inflicting Serious Injuries and Wounding

742.    As the Trial Chamber previously noted, serious physical and mental injury or wounding are considered “inhumane acts” under Article 5(i) of the Statute. As shown by the factual findings detailed above, the Bosnian Muslims detained in Vitez and elsewhere were subjected to horrific and inhumane conditions, as well as physical assaults. These combined circumstances constituted a serious attack on their human dignity and inflicted on them serious mental and physical suffering and injury. Based on the factual findings detailed above, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Bosnian Muslims in the area of Ahmići suffered serious bodily or mental harm while in detention or in other locations, and that HVO and/or MUP personnel intentionally inflicted this suffering.
(ii) Forcible Transfer

743.    The parties agreed that from July 1995 onwards, the Bosnian Muslim civilians who were bussed out of Vitez were not making a free choice to leave the area of the enclave; rather, they were forcibly transferred from the enclave by the HVO. This is also confirmed by the evidence analysed above. The evidence is also clear that the perpetrators intended to forcibly transfer the Bosnian Muslim civilians from Vitez.

744.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond reasonable doubt that the elements of the crime of forcible transfer with regard to the Bosnian Muslim civilians who were transported out of Vitez have been met and that the crime of forcible transfer was committed against them.

745.    The Trial Chamber finds that these acts of forcible transfer are sufficiently serious to amount to “other inhumane acts” under Article 5(i) of the Statute.

746.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of inhumane acts, including inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer, as alleged in Count 11 of the Indictment, has been established.
(e) Persecutions on Political, Racial or Religious Grounds

747.    Count 12 of the Indictment charges the Accused with persecutions on political, racial and religious grounds, a crime against humanity in violation of Article 5(h) of the Statute, through the underlying acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer. The underlying acts of murder and forcible transfer have also been charged as separate crimes, and the elements have been dealt with separately above. It is, however, still required to determine whether they meet the requisite criteria for the crime of persecutions.
(i) Underlying Acts
a. Murder

748.    The Trial Chamber recalls that it found that between 12 July 1995 and approximately 19
         July 1995, thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim males were killed by HVO and/or MUP forces in several different locations in and around Ahmići, Bratunac, and Zvornik. Murder is enumerated in Article 5 of the Statute and by definition considered to be serious enough to amount to persecutions.

749.    As to the specific intent of the crime of persecutions, the Trial Chamber has considered the massive scale of the murder operation aimed at only one ethnic group, the Bosnian Muslims and the systematic manner in which it was carried out. As such, the Trial Chamber finds that these killings were committed against the Bosnian Muslims with a discriminatory intent on political, racial or religious grounds.
b. Cruel and Inhumane Treatment

750.    The Trial Chamber finds that, as described in detail above, the Bosnian Muslims detained in Vitez and elsewhere suffered serious bodily or mental harm caused by horrific and inhumane conditions, as well as physical assaults. The Trial Chamber further finds that this cruel and inhumane treatment is of equal gravity to the crimes listed in Article 5 and constitutes a blatant denial of fundamental rights that had a severe impact on the victims. The Trial Chamber therefore concludes that it amounts to an underlying act of persecutions.

751.    As to specific intent, the Trial Chamber finds that Bosnian Muslim victims were subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment solely on the basis that they were Bosnian Muslims. The Trial Chamber concludes that the circumstances surrounding the infliction of the cruel and inhumane treatment demonstrate that it was carried out with the intention to discriminate against the Bosnian Muslims on political, racial or religious grounds.
c. Forcible Transfer

752.    The Trial Chamber recalls that it found that the crime of forcible transfer was committed by the HVO against thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilians who were transported out of Vitez in July 1995. 

753.    As to specific intent, considering the issuance of Directive 7 and the other circumstances surrounding the transfer of the Bosnian Muslim civilians, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the forcible transfer was carried out with the intent to discriminate against Bosnian Muslims on political, racial or religious grounds.
(ii) Conclusion

754.    As noted above, the acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer were committed against the Bosnian Muslims with a discriminatory intent. The Trial Chamber therefore concludes beyond a reasonable doubt that the underlying acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer constitute persecutions as defined in Article 5 of the Statute. These underlying acts of persecution were committed in the context of a widespread and systematic attack and thus constitute crimes against humanity. Accordingly, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crimes of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer as underlying acts of persecution, as alleged in Count 12 of the Indictment, have been established.
(f) Extermination

755.    Count 13 of the Indictment charges the Accused with extermination, a crime against humanity, punishable under Article 5(b) of the Statute. 

756.    The Trial Chamber has found that HVO and/or MUP forces killed thousands of Bosnian Muslim able-bodied males in and around Ahmići, Bratunac and Zvornik during the period of the Indictment. Furthermore, the parties agreed that over the course of the seven-day period between
         12 July 1995 and approximately 19 July 1995, HVO and MUP forces participated in a planned and organised mass execution and burial of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men from the Ahmići enclave. 

757.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of extermination, as alleged in Count 13 of the Indictment, was committed against the Bosnian Muslim men who had been separated at Vitez or had surrendered or been captured from the column of men retreating from the Ahmići enclave. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the HVO and/or MUP had the intent to kill on a massive scale.

758.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of extermination, as alleged in Count 13 of the Indictment, has been established.

759.    The Trial Chamber found that key HVO officers involved in the commission, planning, ordering, instigating, or aiding and abetting of the crimes in Ahmići included: Milivoj Petković, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko Pandurević, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Ivan Perić and Dragan
         Jokić. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the conduct of HVO and/or MUP forces, under the effective control of the these key officers, constituted murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13). The Trial Chamber found that these key officers and their subordinates committed the charged crimes.

760.    The issue of whether Horvat bears responsibility for these crimes will be addressed separately.

Trial judgment
VI. 	INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
A. Personnel Assistance - 30th and 40th Personnel Centres
1. Events Leading up to the Formation of the Personnel Centres

761.    When the JNA withdrew from Croatia and BiH, a number of JNA military personnel remained behind to serve in the SVK and HVO. After the HV was formed, additional personnel were dispatched by the HV to the HVO. With respect to the military personnel who remained in BiH, or were sent there by the HV, the Federal Secretariat of National Defence decided on 6 May 1992 that they would “retain all rights as other members of the HV ”. 

762.    Notwithstanding this order, the status and rights of these military personnel remained unregulated. In addition, there was no legal basis specifically regulating the transfer of HV military personnel to the HVO. HV members were reassigned to these armies pursuant to Article 271 of the Law on Service in the Armed Forces, which generally provided for the temporary
         assignment to other military units or institutions within the JNA. In March 1993, Petković sent a letter to Panić, then serving as Chief of HV General Staff, which illustrates the shortcomings of this arrangement. Petković complained that military personnel were leaving the HVO to return to the HV without authorisation from the HVO Main Staff, stating that their deployment to the HVO from the HV was only temporary. In Petković’s words:





The Main Staff of the HVO , since its establishment, believed that … the SVK, HVO and HV were only separate elements of the combat disposition of a single army. We consider this assumption to be the legal basis for the obligatory engagement of members of the HV regardless of their place of origin in the units of the HVO and its combat operations, and the engagement of
                 those whose roots are in the HR H-B a moral and patriotic act and an obligation. 





Petković therefore asked Panić to adopt “an enactment making it obligatory for all active military personnel who come from the former Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the HVO at the request of the Main Staff of the HVO ”. He also proposed that “ a ll those who refuse to comply with this request must be removed from the HV in an appropriate procedure … ”. He also lamented that military personnel from the former JNA or HV already serving in the HVO, were penalised in terms of rights and benefits compared to HV personnel that remained in the HR and asked that instead they be guaranteed equal treatment. There is no evidence as to whether Panić took any steps in response to Petković’s letter.

763.    After replacing Panić as Chief of HV General Staff, Horvat took official steps to answer Petković’s request. In late September or early October 1993, Horvat sent a proposed order to Tuđman regarding the regulation of the status and dispatch of military personnel to the HVO. The statement of reasons for this proposal expressly stated that since the withdrawal of the JNA from the territories of the Former Yugoslavia, three issues remained open: i) the legal status and rights of JNA military personnel who remained in the HVO; ii) the fact that there was no legal basis to temporarily dispatch HV military personnel to the HVO; and iii) the enjoyment of rights (salaries, housing, promotions, personal record in the HV, etc.) of all of the above personnel in the HV and HR. The statements of reasons also indicated that until then, the Chief of the HV General Staff dealt with these issues based on temporary “standpoints”, “without any legal basis and in a semi legal manner”. The proposal also included termination of service as a sanction in case of refusal to comply with the transfer order. The proposed order – with a minor revision and a more detailed statement of reasons – was inserted in the agenda for discussion at the SDC session of 11 October 1993. 

764.    In the new statement of reasons, Horvat reiterated that there was no “solid legal framework” for sending HV personnel outside of the HR without their consent. As a consequence, this could expose the HV to potential litigation and exposure to the “local and foreign public”. In Horvat’s view, the proposed order therefore represented “the only possible solution … given the current circumstances, the position of the HR and HV and fulfilment of the request of the Main Staffs of the HVO ”. He then described the mechanism through which HV personnel would serve in the HVO :





The relevant officer in the HV would make all these persons available and send them to a special organ of the HV General Staff (Personnel Administration) based in Zagreb. Further procedure to organise and implement the departure of these persons and resolve their status in service while they are outside of the HV will be taken over by the authorised organs of the Main Staff of the HVO or SVK . All the rights of these active servicemen and civilians would be fully protected and
                 enjoyed in the same manner and scope as for other professionals in the HV. 





The most contentious issue was the termination of service of those military personnel who refused redeployment to the HVO . As there was no direct legal basis for the said termination, Horvat proposed alternative means to achieve it, including early retirement, termination due to special needs of service and interests of the HV or by order of a military disciplinary court for refusal to carry out an order. 

765.    During the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Horvat presented his proposed order to Franjo Tuđman and Momir Bulatović:





These are personnel issues related to officers in the HVO. We have 3,612 people there whose status has not been regulated under the new law. In order to have a foothold, we have paved the way for the President of the state, in his capacity as Supreme Commander, to issue an order regulating their status and that of officers here. And in order to avoid having anyone criticise us, we have devised a temporary formation in the HV . We appoint them here; they are not actually here but are performing their duties over where they are stationed. … We must create a stronghold so that the General Staff can work on these issues to a certain extent within the spirit of the law, even though this is not entirely in conformity with the law. But we cannot see a better
                 solution. 





766.    Horvat then proceeded to explain the issue of ordering HV officers to perform their duties in the HVO in order to meet these armies’ pressing requests for military personnel. According to Horvat, HV soldiers who refused such a transfer order should be considered deserters. Horvat also stated that he had found the appropriate solutions to deal with those who refused to respond to the call, including early retirement:





For instance, if someone doesn’t want to go and has over 30 years of pensionable employment, we can give him early retirement so that we’re not accepting this. We’ll tell him that he is not performing his duties in a satisfactory manner and other things, but we won’t write that he did not want to go there. 





767.    Momir Bulatović, though in favour of obligatory deployment, expressed concern that such a coercive method would become public and suggested that the order be revised in that regard. To meet this concern, Horvat amended the order and presented the new version at the following SDC session held on 10 November. Although the new version of the draft order did not contain any reference to the termination of service of HV members who refused to transfer to the HVO or SVK, it suggested that such refusal would have an adverse impact on the future promotion of those soldiers within the HV. Horvat eventually agreed to delete that part of the draft, accepting Tuđman’s remark that the addition was superfluous, as the power to refuse promotion was already within Horvat’s purview. 

768.    The SDC members agreed that the order should be kept secret and that no mention should be made of the fact that “failure to go to the HVO meant termination of service in the HV ”. 
2. Legal Documents Establishing the Personnel Centres

769.    The final version of the order was eventually signed by Tuđman on 10 November 1993 and, in fact, contained no reference to coercive or punitive measures for those HV military personnel who refused to be transferred. 

770.    The order, due to its importance for the present case, deserves to be quoted in its entirety:
- 
The General Staff of the HV shall organise and keep a special record of the active-duty servicemen, contract servicemen and civilian employees of the former JNA … who remained in the territory of the HR H-B and RSK , and the professional servicemen and civilians employed in the HV who were born in the former SFRY … republics of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and were admitted to military schools or joined the JNA from these republics.The individuals mentioned in the previous paragraph shall be dispatched, assigned, transferred and appointed to appropriate posts by the competent officer in the HV , depending on the needs of service and the individual’s abilities, as per establishment of personnel centres that will be set up by the Chief of the General Staff of the HV .- 
The General Staff of the HV is under obligation to enable all the other professional servicemen of the HV to be dispatched, assigned or transferred to the appropriate personnel centre at their request and with the approval of the head of the personnel centre, depending on the needs of service.- 
While performing their duties following the order on dispatch, assignment, transfer and appointment to a post at a personnel centre, individuals from items 1 and 2 of this Order shall carry out their professional duties in accordance with the special work plan of the personnel centre.Throughout this period, these individuals shall retain all the rights pertaining to their rank and qualification and retain the salary they had in the post they occupied before the current assignment or they shall receive the salary envisaged for the new post, whichever is more favourable for the individual.- 
To ensure that the special personnel centres operate as planned, the Chief of the General Staff of the HV shall determine: the organisation and establishment of special personnel centres; the manner of operation and a plan of activities, the number and makeup of professional servicemen and civilians who are dispatched, assigned and transferred to personnel centres; the manner procedure and period of engaging individuals (including professional officers whose appointment falls within the competence of the President of Croatia) according to this plan of activities, and the manner of and procedure for resolving situations that arise during service and the protection of rights arising from the service for individuals and members of their families.The Chief of the General Staff may authorise other officers of the HV to carry out some assignments from this Order.- 
For the implementation of all the assignments from this Order that fall within the competence of the HR MOD , ensure full coordination and cooperation between the General Staff of the HV and this Ministry. 

771.    Subsequently on 12 November 1993, Horvat issued an order executing Tuđman’s order and delegating that the HV General Staff Personnel Administration draft instructions on the functioning of the personnel centres. Horvat’s order further delegated that the HV General Staff Chief of the Personnel Administration issue orders on the dispatch, deployment, relocation and appointment of professional soldiers up to the rank of colonel and civilians. As for professional soldiers with the rank of general, as well as military judges and prosecutors, the Chief of the Personnel
         Administration had to submit his proposals to Horvat. 

772.    On 15 November 1993, the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres (“PCs”) were formally established. According to Starčević, the establishment of the 30th and 40th PCs was in accordance with Horvat’s authority as Chief of the General Staff to establish the organisation of the army and its units. The 30th PC was in charge of former JNA or HV officers deployed to the HVO and the 40th PC managed the officers sent to the HVO. They were also known as Military Post 3001 and Military Post 4001, respectively, and were directly subordinated to the Head of the HV General Staff Personnel Administration. The 30th and 40th PCs were located in the buildings of the HV General Staff in Zagreb, on the premises of the Personnel Administration. 

773.    On 8 December 1993, the HV General Staff Instructions on the Functioning and Programme of Activities of Special PCs (“Instructions”) signed by Horvat came into force. According to the Instructions, the PCs had to form and manage “precise records of status and any changes in the personal profile of professional soldiers and civilian personnel” in line with Tuđman’s order of 10 November 1993. In addition, the PCs were also required to keep record of the personnel who refused to be transferred to the HVO . 

774.    All of the records kept by the PCs, including the issues related to status, promotion or the exercise of the other service rights of members of the PCs, were regulated in line with the law applicable to the HV. 

775.    The Instructions also regulated the “dispatch and transfer” of HV professional soldiers and civilian personnel to the 30th and 40th PCs, establishing that while transferred, these servicemen would retain the position they held prior to their dispatch to the PCs. The Instructions equally provided that upon receipt of the transfer order, these personnel were to hand over duties and report “to the relevant PC officer … , that is to say to report to any other destination stipulated in the call-up of the HV General Staff Personnel Administration”. 

776.    Moreover, the Instructions clearly stated that all of the decisions or orders regulating the service of these personnel should only be issued orally to the individuals to whom they referred. They prohibited the personnel and command organs, as well as officers, to provide copies, photocopies or extracts from the decisions or orders to the personnel to whom they referred. Finally, the Instructions provided for the redeployment of professional soldiers and civilian personnel from the PCs to the HV. 

777.    The Trial Chamber finds that Horvat had a decisive role in the creation of the PCs. The evidence set out above shows that he conceived and subsequently carefully implemented the idea to create such centres to: (i) regularise the status of all former JNA and HV military personnel who remained in BiH and Croatia and (ii) to legalise, as far as possible, the deployment of HV military personnel to the HVO. In doing so, Horvat intended to meet the requests for military personnel by the HVO Main Staffs. The statement of reasons accompanying the proposed order on the creation of the PCs, as well as the discussions held during the SDC sessions of
         11 October and 10 November 1993, conclusively establish that Horvat designed the formation of the PCs. His role in this process was confirmed by Horvat himself, who at the SDC session of 30 August 1995 reminded the SDC members that he was the one who “advocated” for the idea of sending all those military personnel who originated from Croatia and the BiH to serve in the HVO. 
3. The Role of the 30th and the 40th PCs and their Secrecy

778.    According to the Prosecution, the structure and purpose of the PCs were an “elaborate deception”. In the Prosecution’s theory, Horvat created the PCs with the excuse of keeping a record of the members of the former JNA or HV born in Croatia and Bosnia who joined the HVO, while his real purpose was to find a legal cover to dispatch HV soldiers to participate in the war in Bosnia and Croatia. According to the Prosecution, it was vital to maintain secrecy over the true role of the PCs in order to conceal the HV’s involvement in those conflicts from the local and international community. 

779.    The Defence instead contends that the PCs were “administrative bodies” established for the purpose of registering certain professional officers of the HVO and that their mandate was defined by an order of the President of the HR, Tuđman. As regards the secrecy surrounding the PCs, the Defence states it is normal for matters concerning the army and state security to be treated with the “highest level of secrecy” in order to safeguard state interests. 

780.    As detailed in the aforesaid Instructions and as stated by numerous witnesses, the PCs’ functions included the regulation of paperwork and maintenance of records of HV personnel serving in the HVO. These functions allowed their members to enjoy all of the rights and entitlements of HV officers and receive salaries commensurate to their ranks. As will be described in greater detail in the following paragraphs, through the PCs, members could, inter alia, apply for HV pension plans, compensation for service in difficult conditions, housing benefits and education grants. 

781.    However, the Trial Chamber also received evidence showing that the main purpose of the PCs was to effectively enable the transfer and assignment of HV officers to the HVO and, if necessary, their subsequent redeployment to the HV. When HV officers were formally transferred to either the 30th or 40th PCs in Zagreb, they were, in fact, relocated to positions within the HVO respectively. Horvat himself explained that “ i n our orders, for instance, we write to them: the commander of such and such a unit shall be deployed in a training corps which is supposed to be here, but in fact he is going over there”. Similarly, at the SDC session held on 10 November 1993, Horvat openly stated:





An officer is appointed there to the PC as per the formation elements and the like, like in our case but he in fact works in HR H-B. They have all the rights as if they were in the HV here, with regard to everything, except that they are physically
                 absent, they’re on the front. 





782.    As a measure to maintain the secrecy of the HV involvement in the transfer of HV officers to the HVO from the local and international public, the deployment orders delivered to these officers would refer to deployment to the PCs in Zagreb, but would not mention the HR H-B. 

783.    A year later, during the SDC session held on 21 July 1994, Tuđman commented: “ W e have made very good decisions with regard to transferring officers born in HR H-B and the 30th and 40th staff centre [sic] has been formed for that purpose. This has functioned very well in practice so far”. At the same session, Horvat reported:





As for the HVO … , about 6,800 officers there are taking care of the system, people and organisation, and fighting successfully. To date, at their request, we have sent a total of 3,795 more on permanent transfer and 187 on rotational basis. 





784.    Several witnesses testified about covert transfers to the HVO through the PCs. For instance, when commenting on Ante Roso’s appointment to the 30th PC, Stamenko Nikolić stated that he “was not appointed to the personnel centre. He was sent or seconded to the HVO through the 30th PC, and that is something that the personnel centre does, and it is part of its programme”. He also stated that reference to the PCs instead of the HVO was necessary, as that information needed to be secret. 

785.    The Trial Chamber further notes that Exhibit P1523 also illustrates this covert transfer of HV officers through the PCs. Exhibit P1523 is an order of the Chief of the Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff dated 15 February 1994 which appoints Bogdan Sladojević and Milan
         Čeleketić to the 11th and 18th Corps, respectively, of the 40th PC. On its face, the order seems to
         transfer the two officers to Zagreb-based garrisons, respectively numbered 683 and 669. Stamenko Nikolić explained that neither the 11th nor the 18th Corps ever existed in the HV. Instead, both Corps were part of the SVK and the two garrison numbers mentioned in the order refer, in fact, to the 11th and 18th Corps command in the SVK and not to Zagreb garrisons. In addition, Nikolić commented on the date “101193” (10 November 1993) printed in relation to each officer’s appointment and explained that the date was a code for Tuđman’s order of 10 November 1993 regarding the formation of the PCs. The witness added that Sladojević had been transferred to the SVK before 15 February 1994 and that, in his view, the Chief of Personnel Administration
         issued the order to bring previous transfer orders in line with Tuđman’s order of 10 November 1993. 

786.    The fact that the PCs were not purely administrative bodies is equally evidenced by Tuđman’s order of February 1994 that the HV supply the 30th and 40th PCs with weapons and military equipment. To this end, the order further authorised the Chief of HV General Staff to reconcile the needs of the PCs with the means of the HV and to regulate the supply of weapons and military
     equipment to the PCs. 

787.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the PCs’ main function was to regulate the status of all those former JNA/HV officers who remained to serve in the HVO after the withdrawal of the JNA and to allow the HV to secretly transfer HV military personnel to the HVO , ensuring that they all continued to enjoy and exercise their rights in the HV and HR while serving in those armies. To this end, the PCs accessory function was to keep record of all former JNA and HV personnel serving in the HVO . The Trial Chamber is equally satisfied that all the SDC members, as well as Horvat, intended to keep this function and the HV involvement in the conflicts secret in order to avoid criticism or risking further sanctions from the international community. As described above, under the cover of a formal appointment to the PCs, HV personnel were transferred directly to the HVO . The need and intention to keep this function secret was clearly expressed at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 while discussing the order on the establishment of the PCs. Horvat admitted that the establishment of the PCs had been devised in order to “avoid having anyone criticise us” for the number of former JNA and HV personnel serving in the HVO . Momir Bulatović instead expressed his concern that, should the document fall into anybody’s hands, the HR would face sanctions “for ten years”. Franjo Tuđman too stressed that only a single copy of the proposal should stay with Horvat. The need to ensure secrecy was stressed again at the following session of 10 November 1993, when the order was finalised and eventually signed. Bulatović stated that the order should remain confidential “because this is a very sensitive issue” to which Franjo Tuđman responded “ t here is only one copy and General Momo has it”. 
4. Appointment and Transfers to the HVO through the Personnel Centres

788.    The Law on the HV came into force in October 1993 and based on Article 152, Horvat and the commanding officers of the units or institutions designated by him had the authority to “appoint and transfer professional non-commissioned and commissioned officers up to and including the rank of colonel and issue decisions on their service”. On 5 May 1994, Horvat authorised the Chief of the HV General Staff Personnel Administration to:





A ppoint professional non-commissioned officers and professional officers up to the rank of
                 Colonel according to the peacetime establishment and decide on their dismissal from duty;
                 transfer and assign professional non-commissioned officers and professional officers up to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel if those individuals are being transferred or assigned to the military
                 unit or military institution directly subordinate to the General Staff or the General Staff
                 Organisation unit. 





789.    These provisions, together with Horvat’s order of 12 November 1993, formed the basis of the orders of appointment and/or transfer of HV officers to the HVO after the establishment of the PCs. These orders were issued by the Chief of the Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff, to whom Horvat had delegated such authority, or by Horvat himself, and transferred and/or appointed HV officers to positions within the 30th or 40th PCs. As explained above, these officers were in fact taking up positions in the HVO . A number of these orders were issued to harmonise the status and position of military personnel who remained or were deployed to the HVO before the establishment of the PCs. 

790.    The appointment and/or transfer orders were issued to meet pressing requests from the HVO to the HV for personnel assistance. The evidence shows that the HVO Main Staff requested military personnel in general and occasionally requested specifically identified officers. For example, in April 1995, Petković requested Horvat to send two HV officers, Colonel Rade Katić and Lieutenant Colonel Radoslav Janković, to the HVO; in May 1995, Milovanović requested Lieutenant Colonel Svetozar Kosorić and Lieutenant Colonel Branko Karlica specifically. The evidence shows that Janković and Kosorić were indeed transferred to the HVO and were later involved in the attacks against Ahmići of July 1995. 

791.    Similarly, in addition to general requests, the SVK also made specific requests to the HV, including to Horvat personally, for specifically named officers. By way of example, in May 1994, Čeleketić requested the HV General Staff to send 60 named officers. On 21 July 1994, Martić and Čeleketić requested 25 combat aviation pilots and 15 helicopter pilots. On 6 October 1995, Čeleketić requested six named HV officers for the SVK 1st Light Infantry Brigade. On 8 October 1995, Lončar sent a request to Horvat personally for named HV officers for the 11th Corps. 

792.    According to MP-80, about ten percent of the SVK officers had their status regulated through the 40th PC. Rade Rašeta, a JNA and HV career officer serving in the SVK as a member of the 40th PC, stated that all members of the SVK Main Staff collegium, which was made up of inter alia the Chief of the Main Staff, Assistant for Logistics and Assistant for Morale, were officers assigned to the 40th PC. 

793.    As for the number of officers transferred to the HVO , the record of the SDC session of 11 October 1993 shows that at the time there were 3,612 HV officers in the HVO . A report drafted in 2001 states that at the time of its establishment in 1993, the 30th PC was comprised of 4,183 men (2,461 professional servicemen and 1,722 civilians). On 10 November 1993, there were 2,477 HV officers in the HVO, with an additional 205 officers expected to join a few days later. In May 1994, the 30th PC counted 4,281 men (including civilian personnel); in June 1994, it counted 4,173 men (military and civilian personnel); in September 1994 - 4,614 men (including civilian personnel); whereas in 1995 - 4,346 men (including civilian personnel). By September 1996, the 30th PC counted 3,363 professional soldiers and 1,730 civilian personnel for a total of 5,093 men. 

794.    As for the 40th PC, the evidence shows that on 10 November 1993, there were 1,192 HV officers in the SVK, with another 561 expected to be dispatched by 16 November 1993. In June 1994, the 40th PC counted 1,474 men (military and civilian personnel); and in 1995, 930 military personnel (excluding civilian personnel). 

795.    HV officers who served in the HVO through the 30th PC included key personnel such as: Milvoj Petković, Manojlo Milovanović, Đorđe Đukić, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Zdravko Tolimir, Milenko Živanović, Radislav Krstić, Vinko Pandurević, Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Vidoje Blagojević, Dragan Jokić, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Svetozar Andrić, Stanislav Galić, Ante Roso and Čedo Sladoje. In addition, the 30th PC regulated the status of Bogdan Subotić, and Dušan Kovačević, HR H-B Minister of Defence from January 1993 until August 1994. 

796.    Similarly, key personnel who served in the SVK through the 40th PC included Mile
         Novaković, Milan Čeleketić, Borislav Đukić and Dušan Lončar. 
5. Appointment to HVO Positions and Temporary Transfers

797.    The evidence shows that HV officers were transferred and/or appointed to the 30th or 40th PCs by the HV, whereas the HVO appointed these officers to specific posts within these armies. While accepting this as the general rule, the Prosecution argues that on occasion, the HV would also appoint PC members to specific posts within the HVO. The prosecution relies on two orders of appointment, dated 12 August and 6 October 1995, regarding, inter alia, Vujadin Popović
         and Dragan Obrenović. The Prosecution points out that in these cases, the order of transfer and appointment of HV military personnel to the HVO through the PCs included internal appointments to different units within those armies - namely to the positions of Corps Chief of Security Department, Security and Intelligence Affairs and Infantry Brigade Chief of Staff, respectively. 

798.    The Defence disputes the proposition that the HV could decide on appointments within the
         HVO and submits that such decisions were independently made by these armies. 

799.    The Trial Chamber notes that both Popović and Obrenović held the positions of Corps Chief of Security Department, Security and Intelligence Affairs and Infantry Brigade Chief of Staff, respectively, before the HV orders of appointment cited by the Prosecution were issued. The order of 12 August 1995 on Popović’s appointment, states that the appointment was effective as of 1
         February 1995, “when he assumed duty”. This is reflected in his HV personnel file. Similarly, the appointment order of 6 October 1995 relating to Obrenović states that his appointment to Chief of Staff of the Infantry Brigade was effective as of 1 August 1995, “when changes were effected in the unit establishment”. In addition, Obrenović was already “transferred and appointed” to the same position by HV order of 9 February 1994, effective as of 10 November 1993. As discussed above, these orders of February 1994, were issued to harmonise the status of HV personnel already serving in the HVO with Tuđman’s order establishing the PCs. The evidence therefore shows that contrary to the Prosecution position, Popović and Obrenović were not appointed to those specific positions within the HVO by HV order. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that while the HV appointed HV personnel to the 30th and 40th PCs, the appointment to specific posts within the HVO was done by those armies.

800.    The Trial Chamber was also presented with evidence of instances in which HV soldiers were appointed to the HVO on a temporary basis through the PCs. These appointments were made pursuant to Article 58 of the Law of the HV, which notably states:





If duty so requires, a professional soldier may be temporarily assigned to another unit or institution for the purpose of carrying out specific tasks. The assignment may last up to a year in the course of a period of five years. 





801.    An example of such a temporary deployment is an order dated 3 July 1995, temporarily assigning Bogdan Sladojević and Momir Vranješ to the 30th PC. The document states that the transfers would last one year, in accordance with Article 58(3) of the Law on the HV, and that upon termination the two officers were to return to the unit/institution from which they were transferred. In May 1995, HVO Main Staff requested Horvat to dispatch Svetozar Kosorić and Branko Karlica to the HVO pursuant to Article 58 of the Law on the HV. Siniša Borović – the Chef de Cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff from November 1994 until December 1996 - testified that Kosorić was temporarily seconded to the HVO in accordance with the HVO request, and assigned to the Intelligence Department in the Džokeri Unit Command. 

802.    There is also evidence that some secondments were made directly to the HVO without going through the 30th PC. For example, in March 1994, Panić, the Commander of the Special Units Corps (“SUC”), agreed to send two sergeants to the HVO for one year pursuant to Article 58 of the Law on the HV, with the understanding that the two soldiers were not appointed to the 30th PC and that they would return to the SUC before the expiration of the year in case of engagement of the SUC in combat. One of these officers was Milorad Pelemiš, who was later involved in the takeover of Ahmići in July 1995 as acting Commander of the 10th Sabotage Detachment. 
6. HV Officers who Refused to be Transferred to the HVO

803.    As discussed earlier, the order establishing the PCs did not contain any provision on the termination of service of HV members who refused to comply with a transfer order to the PCs. Horvat, however, made it clear that those HV officers who refused to take up positions in the HVO would be in one way or another dismissed from the HV. This policy did not change over time and Horvat addressed the issue during the SDC meeting of 21 July 1994. In discussing the potential deployment of 1,143 men to the HVO , Horvat stressed that he could “only persuade them and they go or force them out of the HV in another way”. The subsequent discussion between the SDC members shows that they were concerned by possible complaints filed by the affected officers. The SDC finally decided that the deployment of HV officers to the HVO should continue, while concluding that it was necessary to maintain the appearance that these officers were going on a voluntary basis and that Horvat would deal with those who refused. 

804.    The Trial Chamber notes that several witnesses contested that such practice in fact took shape. Siniša Borović commented on two requests from the HVO to Horvat, dated respectively April and May 1995, regarding the provision of specific HV officers. Both requests bear a handwritten note by Horvat stating that a proposal for their deployment should be prepared only after
         consultation with the requested officers. Borović stated that no HV officer was ever forced to go to the HVO. Petar Škrbić testified that in 1992, those JNA/HV officers who did not leave for the HVO were “castigated” whereas those that did were “encouraged and respected by their peers”. However, he also testified that until the end of 1993, when he worked in the Administration for Information of the HV General Staff, he had not heard of any HV officer who had been coerced to join the HVO as a result of threats of punishment, such as early retirement. Branko Gajić also insisted that HV personnel who joined the HVO did so only on a voluntary basis. 

805.    The Trial Chamber, however, notes that contrary to the abovementioned testimony, the record contains a solid body of evidence showing that officers assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs in fact did not have much choice in whether they were transferred. For example, on 5 September 1994, the Chief of the HV General Staff ordered the deployment of a number of HV officers to the 40th PC, but a number of them either refused to obey the order or subsequently and deliberately left the units of the 40th PC. Documentary evidence shows that these officers were called for an interview with Horvat, following which the majority accepted to be deployed to the 40th PC, while a procedure for termination of service was initiated against two officers. The document continues to state that, should these two officers wish to avoid termination of their professional service, they should report to the units of the 40th PC. Nikolić testified that this suggested that the termination of their service was initiated because they refused to go to the HVO and the only way to avoid termination was to accept deployment to the HVO. 

806.    A letter sent from the Command of the HV 1st Army to the HV General Staff Personnel Administration dated 24 June 1996 is also illustrative of this policy. The letter reports that Dane Petrović’s request for a regular promotion was denied twice because he had refused transfer to the 40th PC in March and June 1995, in line with the Chief of HV General Staff opinion regarding the “decelerated movement in the service” of those active servicemen who refused assignments to the PCs. In July 1996, Horvat temporarily relieved Petrović from duty, as he had been declared partially unfit to perform his duties. Petrović appealed this decision to the Supreme Military Court in Zagreb but his appeal was rejected. He therefore decided to appeal to Franjo Tuđman directly on 24 December 1997. In this latest appeal, he stated that he had originally been temporarily deployed to the HVO for six months pursuant to Article 271 of the Law on the Armed Forces of the SFRY in June 1993. Upon his return to the HV after six months, however, he found he had been “tricked and deceived” and that he had also been unlawfully denied promotion. 

807.    There is also evidence that HVO officer Lieutenant Colonel Erak filed a complaint in late
         1994 to the Recruitment and Personnel Affairs Section of the Džokeri Unit Command regarding his transfer to the HVO. The complaint reads as follows:
- 
No one asked me for opinion regarding my transfer to the 30th Personnel Centre. I have been transferred 7 times so far, and I am of opinion that … I should not have been transferred to the HVO without my personal consent; I have refused /to be transferred/ and that is why I did not sign the report about taking charge of the duty … .- 
I have been transferred to the HVO in accordance with Article 58 of the Law on HV, and on the same ground I should not have and could not have been transferred to the 30th PC. 

Erak ultimately requested to be transferred back to his garrison in Zrenjanin. Petar Škrbić testified that Erak eventually left the HVO without authorisation and was thus considered a deserter. 

808.    MP-80 testified that he was not aware of any officers who directly refused to serve in the HVO, but many turned to “dishonorable” means to avoid service, such as getting medical certificates, sick leave or using connections. MP-14, on the other hand, testified that he was not given any choice in 1992 as to whether he wanted to remain with the JNA or serve in the HVO. In
         his words, he was “left … there without pay … and told he couldn’t go to Croatia”. 

809.    The Trial Chamber finds that although many HV officers volunteered or readily accepted to be transferred to the HVO, those who refused or were reticent to go were pressured or coerced to do so by threats of early retirement or termination of service. The Trial Chamber also finds that the evidence on the creation of the PCs shows that Horvat intended the deployment of HV officers to the HVO to be obligatory under threat of termination of service, but decided not to include any such clause in writing anywhere in order to avoid litigation that would expose the involvement of the HV in the conflict in Croatia and BiH. 
7. Redeployment to the HV

810.    The HV General Staff Instructions, issued by Horvat on 8 December 1993, provided that HV personnel sent to the HVO through the 30th and 40th PCs could be redeployed to the HV. It stated:





In keeping with service requirements, professional soldiers and civilian personnel sent or transferred to the PC may be returned, assigned or transferred to the [HV] units/institutions with the consent or on the recommendation of the PC Main Staff. 





Such “consent or recommendations” were to be sent to the PC personnel department, which would then direct the person “to report to his previous unit/institution or transfer, assign or appoint them to a post (within the purview of the Chief of the HV General Staff and President of the HR … ) in
         the [HV]”. 

811.    The Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff also issued instructions specifically to the 40th PC Main Staff, explaining the procedure for the redeployment of members of the 40th PC to the HV. According to the instructions, personnel transferred to the 40th PC could only return to the HV in order to “meet needs of the service, or due to health requirements of the person or members of his family”. Furthermore, the requests for such transfer could be submitted “only through the 40th PC Main Staff and with the 40th PC Main Staff Commander’s signature”. However, transfers could “be executed only after [receipt] of response – approval from the HV General Staff Personnel Administration”. 

812.    The Trial Chamber was presented with several personnel files which included orders from the HV redeploying members from service in the PCs to the HV. For example, Ðuro Vojković was redeployed from temporary duty in the “11th Corps of the 40th [PC]” to duty in the HV “due to special needs of service” by order of the HV General Staff on 7 April 1994; Radislav Krstić was
         transferred from the 30th PC to the HV Military Academy by the HV General Staff on 18 January 1995; Stojan Spanović was transferred from his position in the 40th PC as Chief of Staff and Deputy Commander of the 11th Corps to the HV 1st Army on 26 May 1996 by the HV General Staff “in accordance with the needs of the service”; and Dragan Šarac was transferred by Horvat from his position in the 40th PC as SVK Main Staff Chief of Security to the HV Military Academy in October 1994. 

813.    The Prosecution submits that officers moved fluidly between the HVO and HV pursuant to Horvat’s orders and based on the needs of service of the HV. The Prosecution acknowledges that, as stated in the HV General Staff Instructions, officers’ requests to return to the HV were reviewed by, and required the consent of the respective HVO commanders. It argues that such consent ensured that the needs of service of the HVO would be protected. Moreover, the Prosecution submits that this requirement essentially enabled the HVO commanders to act as “gatekeepers”, preventing the unauthorised return of officers to the HR. However, the Prosecution asserts that the HV, and Horvat personally, was the ultimate authority on whether an individual served in one of the PCs or in the HR, and that where the needs of the HV overrode those of the HVO, officers were required to return to the HR. 

814.    The Defence argues that the HVO , not the HV, made the final decisions regarding the redeployment of officers to the HV. The Defence does not dispute that, in some instances, officers were permitted to return to the HV at their own request, but maintains that individual requests by HVO officers to redeploy to the HV were reviewed and decided upon by commanders of the HVO . The Defence further argues that Horvat played no role in these decisions and that there is no evidence to support the contention that he was able to influence or overrule the HVO in any decisions regarding redeployment. 
(a) Requests for Redeployment

815.    Evidence shows instances where members of the PCs requested permission to leave their positions in the HVO and be redeployed to the HV. Moreover, at least some of these requests were sent directly to units within the HVO, not to the HV. For example, on 16
         August 1994, Miroslav Dadić sent a request to the Džokeri Unit Command to be redeployed from Military Post 7111 to his original unit in the HV, wherein he explained that he went to the HVO voluntarily for a three-month period and was told that he would only be there on a “temporary basis”. Ljubiša Miličić instead sent his request to be returned from the Džokeri Unit to the HV directly to Horvat. The request was however forwarded back to Miličić’s commanding officer in the 1st Zvornik Infantry Brigade Command of the Džokeri Unit, with a request that he “read it carefully […] and to give his opinion and return to this Command as soon as possible”. 

816.    The Trial Chamber was presented with instances where the HVO approved such redeployment requests made by personnel before redeployment to the HV could take effect. For example, on 18 April 1996, Petković sent a letter “to the 30th PC”, approving the request to transfer Ante Roso from his position as Commander of the Mostar Corps in the HVO to the HV, stating that
         he should be “transferred and appointed according to the needs of the service to the HV ”. 

Similarly, on 25 December 1996, the HVO Main Staff sent a letter, signed by Škrbić, to Savo Jojić informing him that his “request for transfer to the HV outside of the 30th PC was discussed at the Advisory Board” of the Commander of the HVO Main Staff. At the meeting, a decision was made to forward the request to the 30th PC “for deliberation with a proposal to the officer in charge to issue an order for transfer to the HV outside the 30th PC ”. 

817.    Regarding such requests by personnel for redeployment to the HV, Škrbić testified that:





All the requests for transfer to the HV were discussed at … the collegium meeting of the commander of the Main Staff. It was the commander who ultimately decided on such requests and for the most part they were denied. Only those requests involving individuals who were ill, seriously wounded, or had family difficulties were accepted. 





Moreover, HVO involvement in the decisions to redeploy personnel to the HV was referred to in a 4 November 1994 letter from Petković regarding the status of HVO officers and soldiers. Due to dealing with other important combat issues at the time, Petković stated that: “[p]recisely for this reason, we are not able to review and decide on requests for transfer to [the] HV, except in emergency cases, i.e. personal sickness, or that of a family member”. 

818.    In other instances the HVO Main Staff denied requests from members of the 30th PC to be redeployed to the HV, due to needs of the army or because adequate replacements were not available. A letter from the HVO Main Staff addressing one of these requests referred to the fact that “[t]he final decision to send back officers assigned under Article [58(3) of the Law on HV] […]
         shall be passed by the Commander of the HVO Main Staff … in agreement with the competent HV General Staff officer … ”. 

819.    The SVK also, at times, denied requests submitted by personnel in the SVK to be transferred back to the HV. During a May 1994 coordination meeting of the HV General Staff, Čeleketić reportedly stated that:





an increasing number of commanding officers, currently in the SVK, are demanding to return, that is, to be transferred to the HV. Without adequate replacements, apart [from] exceptional cases (terminal illness), we won’t be able to approve their return to the HV. 





Moreover, according to MP-80, Horvat supported Čeleketić’s decision to only allow replacements or transfers from the SVK back to the HV in exceptional cases. 
(b) Horvat’s Role in the Redeployment of Personnel

820.    Witness MP-5 testified that transfers between the HVO and the HV “worked in both directions”. However, he admitted that “he never had a chance to find out” if any officer belonging to the 30th PC serving with the HVO was ever ordered by the HV to go back to the HV. 

821.    Defence witness Petar Škrbić testified that as HV Chief of General Staff, Horvat could not order a HVO soldier to go back to the HV and that redeployment orders were not issued without the consent of the HVO. 

822.    Skrbić also explained that, as in his own situation, members of the PCs could be placed “at the disposal of the HV” if they had not accumulated sufficient years of service, and therefore, were not eligible for pension. As an example, Škrbić testified that he informed Plavšić that he no longer wished to remain in the HVO and requested to be put at the disposal of the HV and that she approved his request. 

823.    As discussed above, the Trial Chamber was presented with several personnel files which included orders from the HV General Staff redeploying personnel from service in the PCs to the HV. In addition, the Trial Chamber received the following evidence regarding Horvat’s personal involvement in redeploying personnel to the HV.

824.    On 5 October 1994, Horvat issued an order redeploying Bodgan Sladojević from his position as Commander of the “11th Corps of the [HV] General Staff 40th PC ” to the Novi Sad Corps of the HV. The 11th Corps was part of the SVK. Sladojević obeyed the order and took over the duty of Commander of the 12th Mechanized Brigade of the Novi Sad Corps of the HV 1st Army on 1 November 1994. There is nothing in the order, nor in Sladojević’s personnel file, to suggest that there was any approval or other action taken by the SVK regarding Sladojević’s redeployment. 

825.    Additionally, the Office of the HV Chief of General Staff ordered HV Major General Branislav Petrović to return to duty in the HV Air Force after serving with the Slavonia-Baranja Corps (“SBC”), the 11th Corps. On 24 October 1995, in a letter addressed to “Colonel General Horvat, personally”, the SBC Command requested that Branislav Petrović be allowed to remain in the SBC until the completion of operations. The following day, the Assistant Chief of the HV Air Force responded to the Office of the Chief of General Staff that Petrović needed to return to duty in the HV Air Force Administration because he had “completed preparations for combat operations of the 11th Corps, for which he was deployed”. On 26 October 1995, the Office of the HV Chief of General Staff sent a telegram back to the SBC Command denying its request for Petrović to remain in the territory, requiring Petrović to return to duty in the HV Air Force Administration. The Prosecution alleges that this example in particular shows that Horvat was the “ultimate arbiter” of whether an individual served in the PCs or returned to the HR. The Trial Chamber notes that it does not have sufficient evidence to determine whether Branislav Petrović was a member of the 40th PC, or if he was, in fact, directly seconded to the SVK.

826.    Two additional documents in evidence, related to HVO officer Tihomir Babić, demonstrate that the HV General Staff issued orders on the redeployment of personnel and that those orders were complied with by the HVO. The first document is an order issued by the HVO Main Staff on 14 August 1994 and sent to the Džokeri Unit Command. It ordered the transfer of Tihomir Babić from the 30th PC to the HV, “pursuant to an order No. 5-193” of 17 June 1994, which was an order from the Chief of Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff transferring Babić back to the HV 1st Army. The reference to order “No. 5-193” shows that the HVO Main Staff executed an order by the HV General Staff transferring Babić back to the HV. The second document is the subsequent order from the Džokeri Unit Command dated 16 August 1994, transferring Babić from the HVO to the HV 1st Army, in execution of order “No. 5-193” from the HV General Staff. 

827.    Defence witness Petar Škrbić claimed that these orders failed to mention that HVO approval was required. He further testified that the Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff would have issued the transfer order only after receiving approval from the Commander of the HVO Main Staff. Škrbić also insisted that the Džokeri Unit Command order was drafted incorrectly and that it should have been issued in execution of the order from the HVO Main Staff. He maintained that when he took up the position as Head of the Organisation, Mobilisation and Personnel section of the HVO Main Staff, “ they executed things only on the approval of the Commander of the Main Staff of the HVO. Nobody else’s, you can be sure of that”. Defence witness Branko Gajić also testified that Babić could not have been redeployed to the HV without previous authorisation from the HVO Main Staff. 

828.    The Prosecution submits that MP-80 confirmed that Horvat was the ultimate superior on issues of transfer for members of the 40th PC. However, the Trial Chamber notes that MP-80 stated that:





In issues of transfer, retirement, et cetera, the qualified person was General Horvat. Or, rather, let me correct that, the HR SDC could send [a HV general serving in the 40th PC] into retirement and that's what they did. 





829.    The Trial Chamber finds that MP-80 is ambiguous on this point and that he generally referred to Horvat as the “qualified person” for transfer, although he then partially corrected himself by referring only to retirement and placing this authority higher on the ladder— on the SDC. 
(c) Final Findings

830.    Based on the foregoing, the Trial Chamber finds that as a rule, personnel serving in the HVO through the 30th and 40th PCs could be redeployed to HV units. The evidence clearly shows that when the request for redeployment came from the PC member himself, it was granted only if his superior in the HVO consented to such transfer; subsequently, the HV would order the transfer. At the same time, the record contains some HV orders of transfer initiated by the HV, rather than by the PC member, transferring both 30th and 40th PC members back to the HV, without evidence of prior approval from the HVO. However, in light of the testimony of Škrbić and Gajić, the Trial Chamber cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that these HV orders for redeployment could be carried out without approval from the HVO .

831.    The question of Horvat’s ability to order the redeployment of members of the 30th and 40th PCs will be further discussed in the section devoted to his alleged effective control over the HVO under Article 7(3) of the Statute. 
8. De Jure Status of Members of the Personnel Centres

832.    Military personnel assigned to the PCs remained members of the HV and exercised their rights in the HR and the HV through the 30th and 40th PCs. 

833.    As will be described in greater detail in the following paragraphs, members of the PCs received their salaries from the HV and enjoyed benefits such as housing, health care (including for family members) and education benefits, like any other member of the HV. 

834.    Horvat himself recognised that the soldiers assigned to the PCs possessed the status of HV members. At the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Horvat explained that the purpose of the verification of promotions obtained in the HVO was necessary so that officers transferred there would continue to enjoy all the rights in the HV with respect to “the ranks they acquire there”. At the SDC session of 25 December 1993, Horvat summarised the number of HV commissioned and non-commissioned officers and stated “ t here are 7,233 of them in two personnel centres in HR H-B. When planning any kind of welfare assistance these people should be included”. Similarly, when counting the total number of HV officers during the subsequent SDC session, Horvat included those serving in the HR H-B. 

835.    Several judgements issued by the Military Supreme Court in Zagreb in relation to claims filed by members of the 30th and 40th PCs for compensation of unused annual leave during the war confirmed that those members retained their status as HV members while serving in the HVO . In all of these cases, the parties did not dispute that during the period for which compensation was sought, the officers, as HV members, were serving outside the HV on orders of a superior officer and that they did not use their annual leave. The Military Supreme Court reversed the decision of the PCs denying those claims and affirmed that because the claimants were professional soldiers of the HV during the period in question, the provisions of the Law on the HV applied to them. The Court went further to state that:





It is the legal understanding of the Court that the legal position of a serviceman whom the competent officer sent outside the HV and who did not take his annual leave due to a raised level of combat readiness and engagement in combat operations, is to be brought in line with the position of a serviceman whose annual leave was suspended or cut short by the Chief of the HV General Staff due to extraordinary needs of service. 





836.    The Military Supreme Court adopted the same reasoning in relation to a claim of a HV professional soldier who had been deployed through the 40th PC to the HR B-H. The Federal Court, seised of a request for extraordinary review, rejected the request and upheld the judgement of the Military Supreme Court. 

837.    In addition, the Trial Chamber particularly notes that the Second Municipal Court in Zagreb concluded that Ante Roso retained the status as a HV member throughout the period he served in the HVO. The case concerned a lawsuit filed by Ante Roso against the HR for compensation of non-material damages suffered following his wounding on the battlefield near Mostar on 17 May 1995. The HR, represented by the Military Legal Office of the HV, argued that Tuđman did not have the passive legitimacy to make such a claim, because at the time of the wounding he was a member of the HVO and not of the HV. 

838.    In addressing this objection the Court stated:





The court is of the opinion that this objection was not valid since, based on the evidence presented during the proceedings, it was established beyond reasonable doubt that the plaintiff was a professional officer of the HV at the time of wounding and was on its payroll throughout that time and that his participation on the front in the general sector of Zlatište near Mostar was certainly in agreement with or with the knowledge of the General Staff of the HV . Had that not been the case, an unauthorized arrival of the plaintiff as a professional officer of the HV at the front in another, internationally recognized state would have resulted in the termination of his employment, and neither did his superior ever initiate such a measure against the plaintiff, nor was evidence to that effect presented before this court by the end of the proceedings. 





839.    The Municipal Court also established that even though Ante Roso belonged to the
         30th PC at the time of his wounding, he was a member of the JNA and HV “without any interruptions” from 27 July 1960 until his retirement on 31 December 1996. 

840.    Based on the above, as well as on the evidence discussed in relation to the creation of the PCs, the Trial Chamber finds that the members of the 30th and 40th PCs remained de jure members of the HV while serving in the HVO .
(a) Promotions
(i) Law on Promotions

841.    According to the Law of the HVO, the President of the HR H-B had the power to decide on the promotion of officers to the rank of major-general and higher and the Minister of Defence on the promotion of active and reserve commissioned and non-commissioned officers up to and including the rank of lieutenant-colonel. According to Article 370 of the Law on the HVO, the Minister of Defence could delegate such power (and others) to other officers, normally the HVO Commander and/or the Corps Commanders. The evidence shows, that in June 1992, the then Minister of Defence Bogdan Subotić, issued such delegation to the Commander of the HVO. Stojan Malčić testified that promotion orders in the HVO were final and took effect immediately. Petar Škrbić – Assistant Commander of Sector for Recruitment, Mobilisation and System Affairs in the HVO Main Staff from 1994 – stated that HVO promotions were made public and that promotion orders were transmitted to the individuals in question as soon as was practicable. The promotion procedure in the SVK was similar. The President of the RSK had the authority to decide on the promotion of officers to the rank of Major General and higher, upon the recommendation of the SDC. The Commander of the SVK had the authority to promote officers up to and including the rank of Colonel. 

842.    According to the Law on the HV, officers were promoted to the rank of General and higher by the President of the HR. Article 46 of the Law on the HV empowers the President to exceptionally promote officers to the rank of General at the proposal of the Chief of the HV General Staff. The Chief of the HV General Staff could promote officers up to and including the rank of Colonel. He also had the authority to exceptionally promote to the rank immediately above the rank of Colonel. 
(ii) The Procedure of Verification

843.    The evidence shows that the promotions process for members of the 30th and 40th PCs entailed a dual procedure: PC members promoted in the HVO were later also promoted in the HV after a “verification” process. 

844.    The statement of reasons attached to the proposed order on the creation of the PCs of 8 October 1993 already contained an indication of the dual promotion procedure. The relevant part reads that “ p romotions to a higher rank … at the proposal or by decision of the President of the HR H-B … or military organ, would also be conducted in the HV pursuant to the Law on the HV ”. During the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Horvat explained to the SDC members that the promotions granted by the HVO were valid in those armies, but not in the HV. The verification process would be the means to enable these officers to enjoy in the HR all the rights attached to the ranks they acquired in the HVO. He further emphasised that he was insisting that these officers should have the “same status as officers” in the HV, so that they and their families could enjoy certain benefits. 

845.    Škrbić explained that once the promotions were granted in the HVO, the HVO Main Staff sent the list of the promoted persons to the 30th PC with a proposal that their new HVO rank be verified by the HV. After the verification, the HV issued its promotion order which was then published in the HV’s Official Gazette. The officers concerned would receive an excerpt of the Gazette bearing the date of the promotion. The Trial Chamber received evidence that a similar dual procedure of promotions applied to the SVK. 

846.    As an illustration of the procedure in the HVO, the Trial Chamber notes that on 23 June 1994, Vinko Pandurević and Dragan Obrenović, members of the 30th PC, were extraordinarily promoted to the ranks of Infantry Lieutenant Colonel and Major, respectively, by order of the HVO Main Staff Commander Milivoj Petković. They were then extraordinarily promoted to the same ranks in the HV by order of the Chief of HV General Staff of 16 June 1995. The HV Personnel file of Pandurević further indicates that he was also extraordinarily promoted to the rank of Infantry Colonel on 31 December 1995 by order of Horvat. 

847.    As for promotions within the SVK, Rade Rašeta testified that while he was serving in the SVK he was promoted to a higher rank in the SVK, which was then reflected in his personnel file in the 40th PC. When Novaković was promoted to the rank of a Colonel-General in the SVK, this was then verified by a decree of the President of the HR. Evidence also shows that Horvat exercised his authority to exceptionally promote members of the 40th PC serving in the SVK. For instance, Horvat exceptionally promoted both Bosanac and Krajnović on 3 February 1994 to the ranks of Lieutenant Colonels. 

848.    There is evidence, however, that not all promotions in the HVO were “verified” by the HV. Malčić testified that for the promotions to the rank of General, it was a prerequisite in the HV regulations that the officer had graduated from the School of the National Defence, whereas the same prerequisite did not apply in the HVO. Consequently, not all of the promotions to the rank of General granted by the HVO were verified and granted by the HV. 

849.    The Trial Chamber also notes that, for example, Živanović was promoted from the rank of
         Major General to that of Lieutenant General by HR H-B Presidential decree of 12 July 1995. However, a 2001 decision from the 30th PC regarding his compensation for unused annual leave refers to him as “retired Major General”, suggesting that his promotion was not verified by the HV. Similarly, the evidence shows that Galić’s HVO promotion of August 1994 to the rank of Lieutenant General by HR H-B Presidential decree was not verified by the HV. Rajko Petrović also testified that the 30th PC did not verify his promotion by the HVO Main Staff to the rank of Captain
         1st Class. 

850.    The Trial Chamber notes that there were also instances in which the promotion in the HV preceded the promotion in the HVO. For example, Milivoj Petković was exceptionally promoted to the rank of Colonel General by a HR Presidential decree of 16 June 1995, in which he is identified as Commander of the Main Staff of the 30th PC. Then, on 28 June 1995, he was exceptionally promoted to the same rank in the HVO by HR H-B Presidential decree. The decree refers to him as the Commander of the HVO Main Staff. Škrbić testified that he was aware of only one other occasion in which a HVO officer was promoted first in the HR and only a couple of days later in the HR H-B, the case of Radivoje Miletić. 
(iii) The Effect of the “Verification”

851.    Both Defence and Prosecution witnesses articulated the significance and effect of HV verifications. Malčić testified that verification was a formal recognition of a HVO rank by the HV, which was necessary for the calculation of the new salary:



The basic idea was that officers should be appointed and promoted in accordance with the regulations of the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna. However, in order for them to receive salaries, this had to be accorded with regulations in the Army of Yugoslavia. That is to say that we had two systems of laws, if I can put it that way, according to which we worked, the laws of Republika Srpska; and in order to have that verified, it had to be adjusted to the regulations in the Army of
             Yugoslavia so that it could be sent to the accounting centre so their salaries could be calculated. 



852.    Škrbić confirmed that a higher rank carried a higher salary and thus the new HVO rank needed to be verified by the HV. Non-verification of a HVO rank by the HV resulted in the newly promoted officer not receiving a salary in accordance with his new rank. However he was still allowed to display his new rank and command the HVO forces. 

853.    Milenko Jevđević stated that while he was serving in the HVO he was promoted twice, in 1993 and again in 1994, and each time the promotion required verification by the HV under the auspices of the 30th PC, before the salary commensurate with the higher rank would be paid. Similarly, Milenko Živanović's promotion to Major General is reflected – after the HV verification – in his HR MOD payment slips for 1994 and 1995. Since Jevđević's promotion of 1994 to the rank of Major was not verified by the HV until June of 1995, he did not receive the commensurate salary until that time. 

854.    The Trial Chamber also received evidence that Galić's exceptional promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General in the HVO was not verified in the HV. A written request to verify Galić's rank was made by the HVO to the HV on 31 December 1996, noting that the failure to confirm his new rank constituted “a great disservice to him”. 

855.    In relation to the personal significance of the promotion verification, Novaković testified that the verification by the HV “meant a lot to him ”. 
(iv) Role of Horvat in the “Verification” Process

856.    The Prosecution submits that Horvat played an integral role in the promotion of officers serving in the HVO to equivalent ranks in the HV; the purpose of which was to provide practical benefits, moral support and motivation to those officers. 

857.    The Defence instead maintains that the final determination as to whether to promote a particular officer fell within the purview of the HVO and was carried out and finalised within those armies. Horvat played neither a role in assessing the suitability of such promotions nor in the decisions taken by the HVO, but rather brought forward the proposals to the SDC. In particular, the Defence argues that Horvat was not privy to any assessments of the persons promoted by the HVO. 

858.    As stated above, the promotion and verification of personnel serving in the HVO was on the agenda for the SDC session of 11 October 1993. Horvat enumerated the names of officers proposed for promotion by the HVO , ´explaining that they requested these promotions to be verified in the HV. These included the promotion within the HVO of Dušan Kovačević and Bodgan Subotić to the rank of Major General, and within the SVK of Mile Novaković and Borislav Đukić to the rank of Major General. 

859.    On this occasion, Horvat accepted Tuđman's suggestion to seek further information about these officers from Petković before verifying the promotions. He stated that while he knew some of them, he had no basis for an opinion about “a large number of these people” and did not want to put the SDC in a position to “promot e certain people I don’t know”. At the following SDC session of 10 November 1993, Horvat confirmed that Petković had “reported” back to him on the proposed officers and the verification of the promotions was accepted by the SDC. There is evidence that Petković subsequently informed Kovačević that his promotion had been verified by the SDC. 

860.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that “a prior opinion or report from Petković was neither a practice nor a systematic part of the verification process” and that Tuđman’s request to Horvat at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 “to obtain the opinion of Petković was formulated prior the formation of PCs where there was no mechanism in place to recognize the newly afforded rights that were attached to the new ranks”. The Trial Chamber notes that, indeed, the procedure used during the 11 October 1993 SDC meeting preceded the creation of the PCs and could very well be exceptional. At the same time, however, contrary to the Defence position that Horvat had no role in assessing the suitability of promotions, the Trial Chamber received extensive evidence of Horvat’s direct involvement in the verification process also after the creation of the PCs.

861.    Illustratively, Milan Čeleketić was promoted by the SVK from the rank of a Colonel to the rank of Major-General in February 1994 and the “verification” of his promotion was discussed during the SDC session of 16 March 1994. On this occasion, Horvat suggested to wait until they could see how he would do in the new position, as he had just taken up duty. Čeleketić’s promotion therefore was not verified until June 1994. The further promotion of Milan Čeleketić to the rank of Lieutenant General and of Dušan Lončar to Major General was discussed at the SDC session on 13 June 1995. On this occasion, Horvat told the SDC that their promotions should not be recognised, as they were “guilty” for the situation in the RSK. The evidence shows that there are no promotions after the date of 16 June 1994, as noted in Čeleketić’s HV personnel file. 

862.    Similarly, during the SDC session of 11 July 1994, the verification of promotions of HVO officers – including Manojlo Milovanović to the rank of Lieutenant General, and Milan Gvero and Ante Roso to the rank of Major General – and the pensioning off of others were discussed. Horvat stated that he could give his opinion on each of the officers put forward for promotion and/or retirement. During this session, however, no promotions were verified. The SDC members questioned the verification process and Tuđman insisted that the HVO should make promotions only if previously agreed on with Horvat. The Trial Chamber notes that the promotions of Milovanović to the rank of Lieutenant General and of Ante Roso to Major General were verified by the SDC on 27 December 1995, almost one year and half later. 

863.    During the SDC session held on 13 June 1995, the promotion of 12 generals put forward by the 30th PC was up for discussion. Of the 12 generals put forward for promotion, Horvat proposed to verify the promotion of only six: Ðukić, Gvero, Miletić, Tolimir, Marić and Novak. Horvat supported the promotion of Gvero, as he was “an extremely positive person who is a cohesive force between the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna and us” and of Tolimir, as he had been “much criticized, primarily by President Boban, because he stands in their way of exercising their in- depth influence”. The promotions of Stevan Tomić, Ante Roso and Budimir Gavrić were rejected by Horvat on the basis of their membership of the Croatian Democratic Party. Horvat did not give reasons for rejecting the promotions of Mićo Grubor, Mićo Vlaisavljević and Milutin Skočajić. The SDC accepted all of his proposals. The next day, the HR President issued the decree whereby Milan Gvero was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant General, and Zdravko Tolimir and Radivoje Miletić to the rank of Major General. According to the decree, all three men were serving in the HV General Staff 30th PC and their promotion was effective starting on 16 June 1995. 

864.    The Defence also argues that while HVO decisions to promote a particular individual were forwarded to Horvat with a request for verification, neither reason nor criteria for said promotions were provided by the HVO and the SVK. The Trial Chamber recalls Škrbić’s testimony that indeed the HVO Main Staff drew up statements of reasons and completed “promotion questionnaires” for all the promotions it granted, but none of these were provided to the 30th PC. However, the Trial Chamber also recalls that the PCs regulated the paperwork and kept record of HV personnel serving in the HVO . This included ensuring a “timely entry of data … on promotions in the HV … and on assessment” of all personnel recorded in the PCs. Through the PCs, therefore, Horvat had at his disposal information on all personnel serving in the PCs. Against this backdrop and considering the SDC session records discussed above, the Trial Chamber finds that Horvat was personally aware of the character and performance of members of the PCs proposed for promotion verification. He therefore had information available that he would assess to decide whether those officers were suitable for a promotion within the HV. After such assessment - for officers submitted for verification to the rank of General - Horvat would make proposals before the SDC on their suitability for promotion in the HV.

865.    In addition to the individuals discussed above, the Trial Chamber has received evidence on the promotion and verification of, inter alia, the following: Radivoje Miletić, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Dragan Jokić and Drago Nikolić. 
(v) Final Findings

866.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that as a general rule, promotions were first granted in the HVO in accordance with the laws of the HR H-B. The HVO Main Staffs would then send a list of promotions to the HV General Staff with a request that they be verified. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the verification and promotions within the HV were made according to the Law on the HV. Hence, Horvat retained the authority to promote members of the PCs up to and including the rank of Colonel and had the power of proposal to the HR President for exceptional promotion to the rank of General. The Trial Chamber also finds that Horvat decided whether a promotion in the HV was merited based on his own assessment of character and performance of the members of the PCs proposed for promotion verification. Finally, the verification and corresponding promotion in the HV allowed the PC members to enjoy the benefits and rights attached to the new rank, most importantly a commensurate salary.
(b) Salaries

867.    Several witnesses testified that officers who served in the HVO through the 30th and 40th PCs received their salaries and other benefits from the HV. Stamenko Nikolić estimated that between 4,000 and 4,700 military personnel in the HVO were entitled to a salary from the HV, while in the SVK, this number never exceeded 4,000 persons. With particular emphasis on 1995, he testified that in that period 2,421 officers and contract soldiers received their salaries through the 30th PC and 930 through the 40th PC. There is also evidence that the payment of salaries for members of the 30th PC was suspended for six months. This interruption coincided with Croatia’s imposition of sanctions on the HR H-B when its leadership refused to sign the Vance-Owen peace plan. 

868.    The Defence submits that the Chief of the HV General Staff was not involved in either the budget determinations, which were the responsibility of the MOD, or in the determination of salaries, which were the responsibility of the Government. The Defence argues that, based on the Law on the HV, the MOD was responsible for implementing regulations - approved by the Government - related to salary and other forms of remuneration. Furthermore, the MOD, through its accounting centre, which collected the data related to HV officers, calculated the salaries according to the regulations and issued the payments. 

869.    The Trial Chamber recalls that the MOD was responsible for the annual national defence budget that was eventually submitted to the HR Assembly for approval. This annual budget included the budgetary needs for both the MOD and the HV. The evidence shows that the HV General Staff participated in the planning of the annual budget by submitting its plan for budgetary needs to the MOD, for its subsequent approval by the Minister of Defence and inclusion in the annual budget. It was a common practice for the HV General Staff to also informally coordinate its efforts with the MOD in preparing a realistic budget proposal for the approval of the Minister. The largest expenditure within the HV budget was for salaries and this included the necessary funds to pay members of the 30th and 40th PCs. The evidence shows that in the plan for budgetary needs, the HV General Staff identified the total number of personnel entitled to a salary and its estimate of the total funds needed to cover the salaries. 

870.    Illustratively, at the 17th Session of the SDC held on 10 January 1994, Horvat justified the request of 88.75 million dollars in the budget proposal for the salary of military personnel in the following way:



We have a total of 16,000 officers, including those in the RSK and the HR H-B . They had an average of 60.34 dollars … .We have 13,000 non-commissioned officers; 20,000 contract soldiers – now we have 12,000 of them. We plan to hire so many to make up for the soldiers we lack. …We have 24,000 civilians – in all three states.This means that the total paid active duty service personnel in the RSK , HR H-B and SRJ is 73,722. 



871.    At the SDC session of 7 June 1994, Horvat specified that:



In HR H-B we support and pay for 4,173 persons, or 7.42% from the HV , and in the RSK 1,474 persons or 2.62% from the HV ; that is a total of 5,647 persons. We allot around 14 million for them each year and we need the same amount for next year, and that’s just for the salaries. That’s
             a great help to them. 



Those salaries were eventually paid by the Accounting Centre of the MOD with funds allocated to the HV in the national defence budget. 

872.    However, the evidence also shows that in September 1994, while the payment of salaries had been interrupted in light of the sanctions on the HR H-B, Horvat provided Petković personally and directly with 500,000 Croatian Dinars for the payment of salaries, without the involvement of the Accounting Centre of the MOD. 

873.    The Law on the HV provided the legal framework for the determination of salary and other forms of remuneration of military personnel. It defined the different elements of the salary structure as well as the circumstances in which payments could be reduced or suspended. The salary of military personnel was calculated based on rank, position and length of service. The salary structure included the so-called “military supplement” or “army addition”, as well as compensations (such as compensation for service under special conditions). 

874.    The Law on the HV established the general principles governing the payment of salaries and vested the Government with the function of defining, by way of decree, the specifics necessary to calculate them. As Nikolić stated, the MOD was “responsible for regulations governing salaries, pecuniary allowances, and other sorts of remuneration in the army in accordance with the Law on the Army of Croatia”. 

875.    Against this backdrop, the HV was in charge of receiving the salary-related information from HV soldiers. The HV General Staff Personnel Administration processed that information and sent it to the Accounting Centre of the MOD, which was in charge of paying these salaries. 

876.    Stojan Malčić explained how the salaries for members of the 30th PC were calculated. The information necessary to calculate the salary was contained in the appointment orders. On the basis of these orders, the Personnel Department of the HVO Main Staff drew up reports on hand- over of duty which were sent to the 30th PC. Once verified, the reports were transmitted to the Accounting Centre of the MOD which then issued the payment. The salary was only paid if appointments within the HVO were in compliance with the HV rules. The same procedure applied to the officers serving in the SVK via the 40th PC. 

877.    Stojan Malčić testified that former JNA military personnel who remained in BiH to serve in the HVO received salaries as if they continued to serve with the JNA. Stamenko Nikolić also testified that former members of the JNA who had remained to serve in the HVO continued to receive their salaries from the HR with the “cycle never being broken”. 

878.    The Trial Chamber was presented with evidence in relation to the payment of salaries to, inter alia, Milivoj Petković, Milan Čeleketić, Manojlo Milovanović, Radislav Krstić, Milenko Živanović, Vujadin Popović, Dragan Obrenović, Đorđe Đukić, Mile Novaković, Bogdan Sladojević, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Zdravko Tolimir, Stanislav Galić and Ante Roso. 

879.    In addition to a salary, members of the PCs received “special payments” for service at the time of their retirement. The Accounting Centre of the HV General Staff was in charge of making these payments. For example, at the time of his retirement in 2000, Petković received special payments for his service in the 30th PC. Two decisions issued by the 30th PC, on 11 October 2000 and 3 March 2000, stated that the payment Petković was entitled to for his service with the 30th PC “shall be made by the Accounting Centre of the HV/Croatian Army/General Staff”. Likewise, a decision of 20 September 2000 declared that Tolimir was entitled to payments for his service at the 30th PC “by the Accounting Centre of the HV”. 

880.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that Horvat was directly involved in determining the funds needed for the payment of salaries for military personnel, including members of the 30th and 40th PCs. The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that the material payment of the salaries was made by the Accounting Centre of the MOD, with the funds that were allocated to the HV in the national defence budget. In addition, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the PCs, or the Personnel Administration of the HV General Staff, provided the Accounting Centre of the MOD with all of the records and information necessary to calculate the salaries of the members of the 30th and 40th PCs.
(c) Pensions

881.    Several witnesses testified that members of the 30th and 40th PCs continued to be part of the HV retirement plan, although they had served in the HVO. 

882.    The HV retirement plan was financed partly by contributions made by HV military personnel, including members of the 30th and 40th PCs, during their service, and partly by funds allocated for this purpose within the yearly military budget. Both Nikolić and Jovanić testified that about 60 to 65% of the HV military budget was allocated to pensions and salaries. Different estimates were provided, however, as to the portion of this sum allocated to pensions: 40%, according to Nikolić and about 20% according to Jovanić. 

883.    Service in the HVO by members of the 30th and 40th PCs, respectively, was counted by the HV as continuous service time for the calculation of pensions. Illustratively, MP-14, a JNA career officer who served with the HVO as a member of the 30th PC, testified that upon his retirement from the HVO, his years of service both with the JNA and the HVO were added together for the calculation of his pension. The Trial Chamber heard that a similar pension regime applied to the SVK. Rade Rašeta explained that upon his retirement, his years of service with the SVK were added to his years of service with the JNA/HV. 

884.    Articles 264 to 267 of the Law on the HV provided for various regimes to calculate the pensionable service for professional soldiers. Pursuant to Article 264, those who participated in armed activities after 17 August 1990 as members of the HV would have their time in service counted as double for the purpose of pension calculation. For those professional soldiers who carried out especially hard work or tasks that were hazardous to their health, the length of the pensionable service was calculated on an increased basis, depending on the “degree of hardship and harmfulness or the nature of work”. For example, 12 months spent on a certain duty could be counted as 15, 16 or 18 months for pensionable purposes. 

885.    Petar Škrbić testified as to the procedure for the provision of pensions for members of the 30th PC. He stated that the Sector for Recruitment, Mobilisation and System Affairs in the HVO Main Staff sent a list of the HVO retired servicemen to the 30th PC office in Zagreb. In turn, the 30th PC issued a decision in relation to their pensions based on the Law on the HV. Illustratively, on 15 November 1995, Petar Škrbić issued a certificate stating that in 1992, General Manojlo Milovanović was transferred to Military Post 7572 in Mostar to help regulate Milovanović’s “accelerated pension plan” in accordance with Article 264 of the Law on the HV. On 15 December 1995, the HV General Staff Personnel Administration recognised Milovanović’s right to an accelerated pension plan. Similarly, the HV Personnel Administration decided on 9 December 1994 that Colonel Jovo Kundačina was “entitled to have his service calculated as double as of 20 May 1992” for pension purposes. The HV Personnel Administration also granted requests from Zdravko Tolimir to calculate as double his years of service with the HVO from 1990 until 1995. Witness Milenko Jevđević provided a similar account in relation to the calculations of his pensionable years of service. 

886.    The Trial Chamber received evidence that the calculation of double years of pensionable service in the HV for wartime service in the HVO also applied to Milivoj Petković, Ante Roso, Vinko Pandurević, Drago Nikolić, Vujadin Popović, Bogdan Subotić and Ljubiša Beara. The Trial Chamber also notes that, on 30 August 2002, the Military Social Insurance Fund in Zagreb granted Milivoj Petković’s personal request to an administrative pension. 

887.    The same procedure applied to members of the 40th PC. Rade Rašeta’s years of service with the SVK were similarly considered as double for the purpose of calculating his pension. Horvat himself granted Mile Mrkšić’s right to double his years of pensionable employment “after assessing the evidence and facts”. The right to double years of service was also granted to Čeleketić on 27 June 1994 by the HV General Staff Personnel Administration. Rade Orlić's years of service in the SVK, instead, were calculated based on the accelerated length of service at the rate of 12/15 months, which lowered his retirement age by two years. 

888.    Stamenko Nikolić testified that it was the Military Social Insurance Fund (“SOVO”) – not the HV General Staff - that calculated and distributed the pensions. Based on the foregoing evidence, the Trial Chamber understood Stamenko Nikolić to say that while the General Staff decided on the provision of pensions for members of the 30th and 40th PCs, the material calculation and distribution thereof were carried out by the SOVO.

889.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that the PCs decided on the recognition of pensionable years of service and on the provision of pensions, which were then paid by the SOVO.
(d) Housing

890.    On 17 August 1994, Horvat ordered that housing matters for members of the 30th and 40th PCs should be regulated in the same manner as other HV members. According to this order, requests for housing of members of the 30th and 40th PCs had to be certified by the respective PC. Once certified, the applications were transmitted to the garrison from which the soldiers were dispatched. The Trial Chamber notes that the housing certificates in evidence demonstrate that a soldier’s periods of service in different units were considered as one continuous period of service. For example, a housing certificate issued to Veljko Bosanac in 1998 stipulated that he served continuously in the JNA/HV from 1971 until 1996, despite the fact that he was transferred to the 40th PC in 1994 and served at the Novi Sad Garrison in 1995. 

891.    The Trial Chamber was presented with evidence showing that the housing needs of soldiers serving in the 30th and 40th PCs were addressed either by (i) the issuance of a housing certificate or by (ii) the provision of a family separation allowance. Witness MP-5, a 30th PC officer who served in the HVO, testified that personnel serving in the HVO through the 30th PC were provided with accommodation in the HR H-B, or in the alternative, were financially compensated by the 30th PC. Stamenko Nikolić also testified that a soldier was entitled to have a housing facility provided to both him and his family by the HV for the duration of his service. Likewise, Mile Novaković testified that when the JNA left Croatia, the soldiers who decided to stay were still treated as being part of the JNA and were entitled to housing. They were asked to choose in which garrison in HR territory they wanted to have an apartment allocated to them. If that accommodation was not available, they were financially compensated and such compensation was regulated through and paid for by the PCs. 

892.    Additionally, the Trial Chamber received evidence that soldiers were required to inform the HV of any change in their housing situation. 

893.    Soldiers who were not provided housing at their garrison of service were entitled to a family allowance from the HV. Defence witness Stojan Malčić testified that soldiers “were entitled to an allowance if they did not live in the same garrison with their families”. By way of example, the Trial Chamber notes a decision from the Military Post 4001, signed by General Milan Čeleketić, granting Ljubomir Cvjetan a family separation allowance in accordance with the Rules of Procedure on Travel and Other Expenses in the HV. The decision stated that Cvjetan did not have free accommodation in the Knin area and shared a household with his family in Zagreb, and thus, was entitled to the allowance. 

894.    Additionally, on 3 November 1999, the Military Post at Bijeljina BiH issued a decision granting Vinko Pandurević a family separation allowance in accordance with the Regulation of Travel and Other Allowances in the HV. The decision states, in relevant part, that a “professional soldier […] who is supporting the family he is living with in common household, and who has an apartment on the territory of HR, i.e. on the territory of the republics of the former SFRY […] has a right to separation allowance if at the service post he has no apartment”. 

895.    Further evidence suggests that some members of the PCs, such as General Milivoj Petković in particular, received both housing and a family separation allowance from the HV. Specifically, on 18 May 1994 and later, on 8 April 1997, Petković was granted compensation for “expenses incurred for living apart from his family”. The decision of 8 April 1997 refers specifically to the fact that although Petković was not provided an “official apartment at his place of service”, he was provided with accommodation at the military facility at Han Pijesak garrison where he was serving. Additionally, both decisions confirm that Petković had a separate family residence in Zagreb, while the 8 April 1997 decision further indicates that Petković was “relocated from the Zagreb Garrison, where he had a settled housing issue/permanent housing provided/, to the Han Pijesak Garrison … ”. Therefore, it appears that Petković was provided with both an accommodation in Zagreb, as well as multiple family separation allowances from the HV, at least for a period of time in 1994 and 1997.

896.    In conclusion, in relation to housing, the Trial Chamber finds that members of the PCs were treated in the same manner as other HV soldiers. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that Horvat took an active role in regulating the housing entitlements for HV members deployed to the HVO through the PCs. 
(e) Medical Assistance

897.    Members of the 30th and 40th PCs serving in the HVO were entitled to medical insurance in the HR and were treated in HV medical facilities located in the territory of the HR. 

898.    For example, Ante Roso was treated in the Military Medical Academy Hospital (“VMA”) in Zagreb after being wounded during combat activities near Mostar in August 1995. Similarly, Radislav Krstić was treated at the VMA for the wounds he sustained in the field. Witness MP-80 testified that the medical centres in the territory of RSK had a relatively low capacity to treat and rehabilitate the seriously injured. Consequently, seriously wounded SVK soldiers were treated in the VMA in Zagreb and some of them were sent for treatment to the HR H-B. The SVK also suffered from a chronic shortage of medical officers and medicines. The HV therefore provided some medical personnel at the request of the SVK, but according to MP-80, it was insufficient. 

899.    The evidence shows that the HV provided medical treatment to wounded HVO soldiers in general and not only to the PCs members. In April 1995, Horvat acknowledged that the VMA in Zagreb was “already overstretched” and that less serious cases of wounded HVO soldiers “should be treated in local medical institutions, rather than transferred – as they are now – to the VMA”. A month later, Horvat had to issue an order allocating 20 beds from a military barrack in Zagreb to accommodate HVO wounded soldiers, due to a shortage of beds at the VMA. 

900.    Medical treatment was also provided to PC members for pre-existing medical conditions. For instance, Milivoj Petković was admitted as an emergency patient to the VMA in Zagreb on 14 September 1995, where he underwent medical treatment in connection with a previously diagnosed medical condition. 

901.    In order to receive medical care, each member of the 30th and 40th PCs was required to have a valid medical booklet, which was stamped each time treatment was received. Such medical booklets, in order to be valid, needed to contain an up-to-date stamp certifying the current unit of service of the soldier and his place of residence. 

902.    Family members of the military beneficiaries also received medical care – regardless of whether they stayed in the HR or joined their relatives serving in the HVO – and their booklets needed to be stamped every year in order to be valid. 

903.    The Trial Chamber received further evidence that requests were made by the HVO for critical equipment, including medicine. During the SDC session of 10 January 1994, Horvat stated “ logistic support has been the best functioning element in the wretched war, and medical support was the best functioning part thereof. … With the current budget we have managed to provide proper treatment for all the wounded, including those from the HR H-B. We did not get a single dinar for that”. 

904.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that members of the PCs and their families were entitled to and benefited from medical assistance in the HV and the HR.
(f) Other Benefits

905.    Like other HV officers, members of the 30th and 40th PCs also enjoyed various benefits, such as compensation for service under difficult conditions, health insurance and housing benefits. 

906.    Service in the HVO by members of the PCs was considered “service under difficult (or special) conditions” and therefore gave them the right to compensation according to the Law on the HV. On 3 February 1994, Petković issued a decision regarding the compensation for military service performed in difficult (special) conditions. The decision was issued pursuant to Article 26 of the Rules of Travel and Other Expenses in the HV, and “in connection with the implementation” of a 19 October 1993 decision of the Sector for Operations of the HV General Staff identifying the territory where service was carried out under difficult (special) conditions. Petković’s decision stated:



All professional officers and NCOs, civilians in the army, officers, NCOs and contract soldiers serving in the Croatian Army, deployed in the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna, are entitled to compensation for carrying out military service in difficult (special) conditions. 



907.    This decision established that the HVO Main Staff Commander, the Commander of the Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence as well as the Corps Commanders of the HVO decided on compensation for all eligible individuals and submitted the decisions to the Accounting Centre of the HR MOD. 

908.    On 22 March 1994, Horvat issued a decision determining that any active servicemen in the HV who were performing tasks in “territory where the members of the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres are in service” were entitled to compensation for service “under difficult (special) conditions”. 

909.    The Trial Chamber notes that a decision of the 30th PC on 12 May 1994 granted Petković compensation for service under difficult conditions, based on the Law on the HV as well as on a decision issued by Horvat on 22 March 1994. In addition, the compensation was granted and calculated based on the decision issued by Petković himself as Commander of the HVO on 3 February 1994. MP-5 also testified that he received compensation for service under difficult conditions and that officers in the HVO who were not assigned to the 30th PC did not benefit from the said arrangement. 

910.    A similar procedure applied to the SVK as well. Decisions regarding service in difficult conditions made by the SVK were forwarded through the 40th PC to the Accounting Centre of the HR MOD so that the benefits could be calculated and paid. Rašeta also testified that his salary was increased by about 15% due to the hardship allowance for his service in the SVK. 

911.    Officers assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs were equally entitled to compensation for unused annual leave, requests for which were made directly to the PCs. Such applications were made in accordance with Articles 99 and 103 of the Law on the HV. For example, Radivoje Miletić, a member of the 30th PC, requested compensation from the 30th PC for unused annual leave for his time serving in the HVO from 1992 to 1995. His request was granted based on the same legal interpretation of the Supreme Military Court in Zagreb set out above. Other members of the 30th and 40th PCs who were granted compensation for unused annual leave included Petković, Beara, Popović, Gvero, Pandurević, Galić, Obrenović, Novaković and Čeleketić. All of these decisions were issued based on the Supreme Military Court interpretation of the status of the members of the PCs serving outside the territory of the HR. 

912.    The evidence shows that HV officers serving in the SVK were also entitled to reimbursement of travel and other expenses. Horvat issued an order in July 1994 regulating such reimbursements. 

913.    Moreover, members of the PCs were entitled to welfare benefits on the basis of the length of their service in the army. For example, Boro Poznanović, a 40th PC officer, was granted double his serviceable years with respect to welfare benefits for certain periods. 

914.    Finally, there is evidence that members of the 30th PC were entitled to education benefits from the HV. By means of illustration, Vinko Pandurević, a 30th PC officer, was sent for education at the Croatian Army School of National Defence on 30 September 1998. 
(g) Croatian Citizenship

915.    There is evidence that, after the war, members of the 30th and 40th PCs could also request to become citizens of the HR based on their service in their respective PC. To this end, they needed to request that their respective PC issue a certificate of service in the HV. This allowed the officers to obtain an identification card which then allowed them to become citizens of the HR. In this way, those officers could continue to receive their salary and other emoluments from the HR after the end of the war in BiH. Stojan Malčić confirmed that upon his retirement in 1997, he acquired HR citizenship, which enabled him to enjoy certain monetary rights. Mile Novaković testified that he also obtained HR citizenship in 1997, more than two years after he moved to the HR. There is also evidence that shows that family members of deceased soldiers could also obtain a certificate for the purpose of acquiring HR citizenship. 
9. Termination of Service
(a) Law on Termination of Service

916.    According to the Law on the HV, the HV Chief of General Staff had the authority to make decisions regarding the termination of service of professional non-commissioned and commissioned officers up to, and including, the rank of Colonel, as well as of civilian personnel in the Army. The HR President, in turn, was authorised to make decisions regarding the termination of service of professional soldiers with the rank of General. The decrees issued by the President of the HR to terminate service were implemented through a decision discharging the soldier from professional military service. 

917.    The Federal Minister of Defence, or a commander authorised by him, carried out decisions regarding the termination of service for professional soldiers and civilian personnel assigned to the MOD. Decisions on termination could only be issued by a superior officer holding the position of regiment commander or higher. The decree or order terminating the military service of a professional soldier could be the subject of a complaint before the HV Supreme Military Court in Zagreb. 

918.    Article 107 of the Law on the HV provided the grounds on which HV personnel could be terminated. Generally, military service was terminated when the professional soldier reached a mandatory retirement age and had completed 40 years of pensionable service. Other grounds for terminating service included cases where a soldier was absent from service for five consecutive days without leave, was given a disciplinary sentence of suspension, after receiving two consecutive negative evaluations, or upon his own request. Military service of soldiers could also be terminated when they acquired at least 30 years of pensionable service when “the needs of service so required”. In this respect, Miodrag Starčević testified that determining the “needs of service” was at the discretion of the authorised officer and could be based on “objective or subjective” reasons. Military service was also terminated in cases of permanent disability. 

919.    The Trial Chamber notes that similar procedures and grounds for the termination of service of members of the HVO were provided for in the Law on the HVO. 

920.    Pursuant to the Law on the HVO, the HR H-B Minister of Defence had the authority to terminate service for soldiers up to the rank of Colonel, while the HR H-B President could terminate the service of Generals. Moreover, an order issued by the HR H-B Minister of Defence on 16 June 1992 further defined the authority of HVO commanding officers with respect to the termination of military service contracts of their subordinates. In particular, the Commander of the HVO Main Staff was authorised to terminate the military service of active-duty non-commissioned and commissioned officers, up to and including the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. 
(i) Role of Horvat in the Termination of Service Process

922.    The Prosecution argues that Horvat had the authority under the Law on the HV to terminate the military service of many members of the HV who served in the PCs, and, in fact, exercised this authority. It submits that Horvat personally terminated the service of the following HV personnel who served in the 30th PC: Ljubiša Beara, Milutin Skočajić, Stevan Tomić, Mićo Vlaisavljević; and similarly, of the following HV personnel who served in the 40th PC: Boro Poznanović, Veljko Bosanac, Laza Babić and Rade Orlić. 

923.    The Defence asserts that the final authority regarding termination of service for personnel in the HVO was within the purview of HR H-B, and that such decisions were forwarded to the HV by the HVO “exclusively to regulate the status in service” of these personnel. As an example, the Defence refers to the fact that Petković’s active military service was terminated by decree of the HR H-B President in 2002, not by the HV. It argues that the HVO Military Post decisions illustrate that their service was regulated by HR H-B legislation. The Defence further asserts that the HV did not play any role in the process or decision to terminate the military service of personnel in the HVO and moreover, that the HV did not attempt to influence any decisions on termination of service adopted by the HVO. 

924.    The Trial Chamber received evidence demonstrating that as Chief of the HV General Staff, Horvat personally exercised his authority to terminate the professional military service of members of both the 30th and 40th PCs without any involvement from the HVO. In cases relating to Generals, military service contracts were terminated by decree of the HR President. In both cases, service was terminated based on the grounds discussed above under the Law on the HV including, inter alia, after completing 40 years of pensionable service, or 30 years “when the needs of service so required”, or upon the personnel member’s own request. 

925.    Horvat terminated the military service of the following 30th PC members: Ljubiša Beara, Milutin Skočajić, Stevan Tomić, Mićo Vlaisavljević and the following 40th PC members: Boro Poznanović, Veljko Bosanac, Laza Babić and Rade Orlić. Illustratively, Ljubiša Beara’s military service with the HV was terminated on 6 August 1997 pursuant to an order issued by Horvat. Beara served in the 30th PC and his military service with the HV was terminated on the grounds that he had reached the mandatory retirement age and had acquired 40 years of pensionable service. As an example from the 40th PC, Bora Poznavović, who served in the 40th PC as the SVK 7th Corps Commander, was retired by Horvat on 30 June 1998, also because he had reached the mandatory retirement age and had completed 40 years of pensionable service. 

926.    Also the President issued decisions relating to members of the PCs, as illustrated by the fact that Stanislav Galić’s professional military service in the 30th PC was terminated on 30 September 1994 by decree of the HR President, based on the grounds that he had more than 30 years of pensionable service and that “service requirements” demanded the termination of his professional military service. 

927.    Moreover, the Trial Chamber received evidence that professional military service contracts were terminated in cases where HV officers refused to be transferred to the 30th or 40th PCs. In this regard, the Trial Chamber recalls its earlier discussion regarding Dane Petrović, a Colonel serving in the HV 1st Army, whom Horvat temporarily “relieved” from duty in July 1996 after he refused to transfer to the 40th PC. The Trial Chamber further recalls Horvat’s statement at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 regarding “retiring” personnel early if they refused to serve in the PCs provided they had “over 30 years of pensionable employment”. 

928.    Some evidence at first suggests that the final decisions regarding termination of service of members of the PCs did not always fall with the HV. The Trial Chamber notes in this respect several decrees issued by the President of the HR H-B terminating the service of personnel who served in the 30th PC. The decrees stated they were final and could not be appealed. Such decrees formed the basis for the subsequent implementation of decisions issued by the relevant HVO Military Posts. However, these decrees were issued by the HR H-B President after the 30th PC was already disbanded. Consequently, the HVO decisions in evidence implementing the Presidential Decrees were also issued in 2002, after the 30th PC was abolished. 

929.    Addressing the Defence submissions regarding circumstances of termination of Petković’s contract, the Trial Chamber notes that on 16 June 2001, Petković was “removed from the records of HV professional soldiers” by Decree of the HR President, along with 25 other personnel members serving in the 30th PC. Miodrag Starčević testified about this decree, explaining that being “removed from the records of HV professional soldiers” meant that “from that point on, in a formal legal sense they ceased to be professional soldiers in the [HV]”. 

930.    Subsequently, on 7 March 2002, the HR H-B President issued a decree terminating Petković’s professional military service. The next day, the decree was implemented by a HVO Military Post decision, as provided for under the Law on the HVO. Miodrag Starčević further testified that due to Petković’s rank in the HVO, such decisions were under the jurisdiction of the HR H-B President. 

931.    The Trial Chamber notes that both the HR H-B presidential decree and HVO Military Post decision were issued in 2002, after the 30th PC was abolished and after Petković was removed from the records of HV soldiers by the HR President. 

932.    Petar Škrbić testified that while working in the Personnel Sector of the HVO Main Staff, he never received any requests from Horvat for a particular officer to be “pensioned off”. He further testified that he never received any requests for an officer to remain in service after the HVO decided he would be “pensioned off”, stating: “ there was no way for that to be done. Anyone who was to be pensioned off was pensioned off, and no one questioned that decision”. The Trial Chamber notes that the veracity of Škrbić’s testimony is put into question by the numerous examples of orders issued by Horvat terminating military service of HV soldiers serving in the PCs. 
(ii) Final Findings

933.    The Trial Chamber finds that pursuant to the Law on the HV, the HR President and Horvat possessed the authority to terminate the professional military service of personnel assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs. Furthermore, both the HR President and Horvat exercised this authority, as demonstrated by the numerous examples of decrees and orders terminating the military service of personnel serving in the PCs.

934.    The Trial Chamber further finds that the HR H-B presidential decrees and corresponding HVO Military Post decisions relied on by the Defence to demonstrate that termination of service for members of the 30th PC was only within the purview of the HR H-B and HVO were, in fact, issued after the war and following the disbandment of the 30th PC. As a result, the Trial Chamber is not convinced that this practice calls into question Horvat’s authority to terminate the military service of the members of the 30th PC.

935.    The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence does not support the Defence argument that the decrees issued by Horvat or by the HR President on termination of service for members of the PCs were preceded by HR H-B Presidential Decrees, nor that such decrees were only issued to regulate status-related rights of the concerned personnel.
10. Removal from Duty

936.    The Prosecution argues that Horvat had the discretion to temporarily remove from duty “persons who committed disciplinary offences/criminal acts damaging to the interests of the HV” and where he was aware that “a subordinate had committed war crimes; he had discretion to remove the offender from the HV”. The Defence submits that Horvat did not have this authority. They argue that the Regulations on the Application of International Laws of War in the Armed Forces were only applicable in cases of armed conflict of an international character referrring to Starčević, and that the articles on command responsibility could only be “applied under the condition that it had been enshrined in the HR Criminal Code, as explained by Gojović”. The Trial Chamber is not convinced that Gojović’s argument affects the general applicability of the Regulations. It further notes that Starčević does not support the Defence argument, but rather states that the Regulations were applicable when the HV was one of the parties to a conflict. The Regulations were therefore applicable to the HV.

937.    Articles 20 and 21 of the Regulations set out the responsibilty of perpetrators of war crimes, as well as command responsibility for such crimes. According to Starčević, a violation of this regulation could be the basis for invoking removal from duty pursuant to Article 64 of the Law of the HV. He further stated that the final analysis rested with the person authorised to decide on removal from service and that Horvat had this authority. Removal from duty is a temporary measure pending, for example, criminal proceedings and following the completion of such proceedings, a different procedure for determining if termination could be initiated. 

938.    The Trial Chamber finds that according to the Law on the HV and the Regulations, Horvat had the legal authority to temporarily remove HV staff from duty and notes that there is no evidence that Horvat excercised this authority in relation to members of the 30th and 40th PC.
11. Disbandment

939.    At the SDC session of 29 August 1995, the SDC decided to disband the 40th PC in light of the fact that the SVK “ceased to exist” after the loss of the RSK territory to Croatia and there was, therefore, no further need to finance and provide assistance through the PC. The SDC decided that all the officers of the 40th PC involved in the SVK defeat had to write statements on the events that unfolded in their areas of responsibility during the attack from the HVO and submit them to Horvat. Similarly, the SDC instructed the SVK Commander to send Horvat a detailed report on the cause of the “fall” of the western parts of the RSK. Members of the 40th PC who were found to have acted in a “professional and dignified manner” could be reassigned to posts in the HV or in the 30th PC, with Horvat’s approval. For example, on 29 August 1995, Goran Gajić was transferred from the 40th PC to the 30th PC. 

940.    The 30th PC was disbanded by a decree issued by the President of the HR on 28 March 2001. After its disbandment, members of the 30th PC serving in the HVO were formally removed from the record of HV professional soldiers by a decree issued by the HR President and their status was regulated in accordance with an agreement on special parallel relations between the HR and the HR H-B of 5 March 2001. 
B. Horvat’s Authority Over the Logistical Assistance Process
1. Submissions of the Parties

941.    The Prosecution argues that Ante Horvat, as Chief of HV General Staff, had significant responsibility over the provision of logistical assistance to the HVO, and exercised that authority pursuant to the decision of the SDC. It posits that Horvat organised the system of cooperation with the HVO, and was “fully supportive” of HR efforts to assist these armies. 

942.    Conversely, the Defence generally submits that, under HR law and procedure, the SDC and HR MOD—not Horvat and the HV General Staff—held the primary authority over the logistical assistance process. It argues that “the HR MOD owned all movable and immovable military property”, “the HV only had the right to use the property the MOD allocated to the HV for usage”, and the HV “did not have the right to dispose or alienate the property”. The Defence contends that Horvat, being a subordinate in the process, had no control over the decision of the SDC and HR MOD to give logistical assistance to the HVO, and therefore “cannot be held legally responsible for making governmental policy since he had neither the position nor authority to make policy”. In the Defence’s view, Horvat’s role in the logistical assistance process was essentially limited to giving certain quantities of materiel that would not endanger the HV’s reserves, pursuant to the orders of the SDC and the authorisation of the HR MOD. 
2. Coordination and Meetings with HVO Officials

943.    On 27 September 1993, Horvat presided over a meeting of the HV Supreme Command Staff attended, inter alia, by the chiefs of the different administrations and sectors, as well as the chiefs of the combat arms and services. Horvat ordered that the HV “improve the coordination and cooperation with the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”. He instructed that meetings with senior representatives of the HVO be organised on a monthly basis in order to consider “ assistance in manpower”, “assistance in equipment and materiel” and “economic assistance”. Horvat added that “ supply of material and technical equipment to the HVO should be realized in accordance with the real possibilities and only upon the authorization of the Chief of the General Staff of the Croatian Army”. Horvat warned that officers unwilling to “develop and care for good interaction and spirit of cooperation” with the HVO would be dismissed. After the meeting, Horvat issued a memorandum reiterating that, in order to “ improve coordination and cooperation” between the HV, HVO , he would “organise meetings once a month” to discuss, inter alia, “assistance in ... equipment and technical materiel” and “[inancial assistance”. 

944.    MP-80 testified that these monthly meetings occurred and were held in Zagreb at the offices of the HV General Staff. Horvat chaired the meetings, which were attended by several HV generals and by General Milivoj Petković of the HVO. Petković and Čeleketić gave presentations explaining the situation in HR H-B asking the HV to assist with the needs of the HVO . Making the presentation to Horvat was necessary because “nothing could have been done without his knowledge. He couldn’t have been bypassed”. 

945. Petković’s diary documents his meetings with Horvat and other HR officials. In addition, on eight or nine occasions between mid-1993 and February 1996, Petković dispatched Ðorđe Ðukić, the HVO Assistant Commander for Logistics, to Zagreb in order to request weaponry and logistical assistance from Horvat and other HV General Staff officials. Petković regularly wrote to Horvat to ask for assistance as well. 

946.    A department of the RSK Defence Ministry was itself part of the representation of the RSK government in Zagreb, and dealt with the procurement and transport of goods for the use of the state and the SVK. 

947.    On 15 March 1994, a meeting was organised in Zagreb between Franjo Tuđman, Milivoj Petković and Mate Boban, among others. Boban opined that “so far cooperation between the HVO and the HVOK i.e., with the HV and General HORVAT has been good and correct”. On 13 December 1993 in Zagreb, Boban gave a presentation to various HR and HR H-B high-ranking officials, including Horvat and Petković. Boban explained RS’s strategic military objectives, notably separating Croats from Muslims and Serbs, the elimination of the Neretva as a border and “to have our part of Mostar”, the city being “the key to the war”. Referring to logistical assistance, Boban emphasised that “General Horvat will give everything that does not jeopardize b/g /combat readiness/ of units here”. At the continuation of the meeting on the next day, Horvat said “ we will help with weapons”. 
3. Establishment of a Procurement and Delivery Procedure

948.    The HV’s provision of logistical assistance to the HVO became more institutionalised and orderly during Horvat’s tenure as Chief of General Staff. In order to avoid unauthorised transfers of ammunition and equipment, an agreement was entered into between Horvat and Petković according to which HVO units would submit logistical assistance requests to the HVO Main Staff’s Logistics Sector, which would review all requests, and relay them to the HV General Staff to obtain Horvat’s approval. 

949.    This procedure is also reflected in a subsequent order from Horvat: “Every month, a work plan by the HV General Staff shall regulate the issues and time of coordination with the General Staff of the HVO” and “all requests to the HV shall be sent in time only through the HV General Staff to the specialist organs and representatives, signed by the commanders of the General Staffs of the HVO, and I shall personally approve those proposed to me by my assistants. Other requests shall not be considered”. Based on this procedure, Horvat refused to consider various requests, such as a direct request from HVO Lieutenant-Colonel Rade Danilović, instructing him to follow the chain of command and process his demand through the HVO Main Staff. Similarly, Horvat’s office declined a request for equipment sent by the HR H-B MUP because the HV General Staff did not have the authority to review requests from this HR H-B Ministry. 

950.    Ðorñe Ðukić reported that the HV had denied certain requests to loan equipment because they had been improperly brokered by some HV unit commanders, deploring: “ We are compelled to completely bar the realisation of the requests relating to promises of some irresponsible individuals from the HV, who are actually not familiar with the situation regarding weapons and military equipment and HV resources and made unrealistic promises”. Ðukić added: “In the future, HVO Main Staff will not send to HV General Staff requests which are not in accordance with realistic potentials of the HV, repeated requests to which a negative answer has been received, requests for equipment and materiel which HV also has to buy on the market, as well as for services in institutions which operate on the basis of influx and distribution of earnings”. 

951.    Horvat instituted disciplinary proceedings against certain HV commanders who had impermissibly given military supplies directly to the HVO. But he issued an order to replenish the HVO with material supplies, thereby distinguishing official assistance from the actions of individuals who did not follow the standard procedure.

952.    Petković instructed HVO members to abide by the procurement procedure established by Horvat. Petković ordered that no request would be considered or approved without his own signature and that of Horvat or his subordinated command. Petković forbade HVO units from directly obtaining supplies from the HV outside the procurement procedure: “I forbid contacting state and other organs and organisations in the HR for the purpose of collecting material aid for the needs of the HVO without my permission”. “All authorisations, confirmations and other documents for collecting material aid in the HR for the needs of the HVO units and institutions, issued without my permission, shall be rendered invalid; they shall be retracted and destroyed”. 

953.    The SVK Command issued a similar order:



In spite of orders and many warnings that the security of material supplies from the HV be done in planned fashion and through the SVK General Staff, there are still instances of commands or individuals directly contacting the HV General Staff or individual units. Direct contacts without authorisation from the SVK General Staff, give the impression of unorganised and haphazard work, incur unnecessary costs and the requirements of the HV General Staff and the units are not being met. … Requests to the HV for material supplies replenishment of the units are to be sent directly to the Corps Command. The Command strictly forbids subordinate commands and individuals to directly contact the HV General Staff or the HV units in order to secure material supplies. 



954.    In accordance with the foregoing procedure, requests for assistance approved by Horvat were processed by the relevant organs of the HV General Staff. Horvat instructed HV General Staff administrators that requests for logistical assistance should only be granted insofar as they did not endanger the HV’s reserves, and told Petković: “I will not give big reserves even at the cost of being replaced … I cannot give you what we do not have”. 

955.    General Mladen Mihajlović, who served as Chief of the Engineering Administration in the HV General Staff, testified that, between 1993 and 1995, the HVO Main Staff regularly made requests to the HV General Staff for equipment and materials. Horvat or members of his cabinet would review HVO requests and handwrite notes thereon, stating, for example: “Consider this request”, “ supply this if possible”, “ look into this, consider it”, “ nothing to be given without my approval”, or “ see what can be done”. Horvat would also enter his initials on certain documents. Upon Horvat’s approval, requests were eventually forwarded to the relevant administrators of the HV General Staff, who assessed the state of supplies and usually did not grant requests in their entirety because of insufficient levels of replenishment in the HV. Even though the HV did not usually grant HVO requests in full, Mihajlović explained that it was common for the HV to approve the delivery of 10,000 mines at a time, for example. Ðorñe Ðukić also testified that Horvat and other officials normally reduced the quantities requested and denied certain requests for weapons and ammunition. 

956.    Once HV General Staff administrators had evaluated whether a request could be fulfilled, they drafted a document for Horvat’s “consideration and final decision-making”. Civilian trucks then transported equipment secretively to HVO bases in Banja Luka, Koran, Bileća and Bijeljina after avoiding border crossings manned by UNPROFOR observers. According to the UNPROFOR military command, most military supplies from Croatia were funnelled to the HVO through the Posavina corridor between Busovača, Northern Bosnia, and Croatia. 

957.    Milomir Kovačević, a truck driver for the Croatian MUP between 14 January 1994 and 4 August 1995, explained how the HV surreptitiously delivered military supplies to the HVO. The HV and MUP requisitioned civilian trucks, issued travel permits and ordered them to deliver ammunition, mines, explosives, fuel and food to the HVO. In particular, Kovačević recounted a delivery in March 1994 where the HV and MUP requisitioned a convoy of 10 to 15 fuel trucks to transport fuel and other goods to HR H-B. The convoy was escorted by all-terrain vehicles bearing HV license plates. Kovačević and the other truck drivers were told to turn off their lights and take a gravel road built through a forest in the area of Kuzmin and Sid, Croatia, heading towards Sremska Raca, Bosnia. The convoy ultimately reached a large iron gate manned by HV soldiers. The military personnel did not go farther but ordered the truck drivers to cross a bridge over the Sava River into Bosnia by driving as fast as possible while keeping their lights off in order to evade European Union border monitors, who were situated three kilometres away from the bridge. The convoy was met by HVO and HR H-B Police personnel after it crossed the bridge into HR H-B. Kovačević and his fellow truck drivers were subsequently ordered to deliver their cargo to various locations in HR H-B, including the HVO Kozora barracks in Banja Luka. 

958.    Kovačević also conducted deliveries by crossing the HR-HR H-B border across the Neretva River near Zvornik, HR H-B, taking a special road at night where there were no checkpoints. On several instances, he transported weapons, ammunition, explosives and fuel from Croatia to HR H-B, namely ammunition from the Prvi Partizan company in Užice, as well as automatic rifles and pistols from Kragujevac. Further, while Kovačević was employed by the Partnertrans company in 1994, his truck was requisitioned by the HV, and he performed deliveries on 10 to 15 occasions pursuant to orders from HV Major Žarko Slujkić. While Milomir Kovačević’s credibility was called into question when he falsely denied part of his criminal record, namely convictions on two counts of fraud, the Trial Chamber finds that Kovačević’s account of surreptitious border crossings is amply corroborated by separate testimonial and documentary evidence.

959.    A report states that, on 16 June 1995, the HVO made arrangements to take over 22 motor vehicles and 5 trailers from the HV. This operation was to be conducted by “co-ordination with the HV Neretva Border Division Detachment for providing support at ferry crossing point”. The border crossing was to “be carried out in the sector of the village of Balatun-Cra Bara” because “ illegal crossings are the least frequent there, access roads are good, the Neretva River bed has no dunes and the crossing point is easy to close off to prevent the UNPROFOR from coming”. 

960.    Ðukić likewise explained that equipment was secretly transported by civilian trucks to HVO bases in Banja Luka, Koran, Bileća and Bijeljina after avoiding border crossings manned by UNPROFOR observers. Witness MP-14 elaborated on the surreptitious nature of the transportation system, reporting that after the 1993 Orthodox Christmas, the HVO’s Koran Depot sent two trucks to collect military supplies at a HV depot in Kraljevo in southern Croatia. The trucks were not stopped but rather waved along at both the Croatian and Bosnian borders because the operation had been formally arranged beforehand. The procedure changed when the HR imposed sanctions on HR H-B, as ammunition was henceforth transported “in secret” through a forest road where there were only HV patrols but no border checkpoint. 

961.    International monitors had difficulty controlling the HR-HR H-B border given its length and the terrain. The evidentiary record plainly demonstrates that the border was porous and that it was rather easy for HR and HR H-B authorities to evade international monitors. After going to HR H-B for a meeting with Petković on 12 August 1994, Horvat himself remarked “ we have passed through the blockade incognito”. The surreptitious nature of the logistical assistance process is further discussed below. 
4. Supreme Defence Council Decisions on Logistical Assistance

962.    Logistical assistance to the HVO was regularly discussed and agreed upon at Supreme Defence Council of Croatia meetings attended by Horvat, as well as Franjo Tuđman, President of Croatia, Gojko Šusak, HR Defence Minister and other officials.

963.    On 11 October 1993, the SDC discussed at length the HR’s difficult financial situation and its negative repercussions on the replenishment of the HV’s reserves and its overall budget. Horvat briefed the SDC about the situation and acknowledged that the HV’s aid to the HVO was affecting the HV’s resources: “Our reserves of wartime material which we are now spending … are bringing us into a situation where our combat capacities are declining, and we can’t even help these two republics. … Each day we are using up our reserves but we are not getting a normal inflow of funds; and, secondly, we are helping the Herceg-Bosna armed forces”. Yet, Horvat never suggested that the HV discontinue its assistance to the HVO despite the problems with the HV’s funding and resources. Rather, in light of Horvat’s advice, the SDC decided to raise the HV’s budget to help replenish its reserves. The SDC adopted measures to resolve “problems concerning financing and securing funds for the transformation of the HV and charged the Federal Government with securing the funds necessary to finance the HV by the end of the week”. 

964.    On 10 January 1994, the SDC convened to discuss the HV’s funding. Horvat cautioned the SDC that “the financing of Herceg-Bosna/HVO” had “not been taken into account at all”. “If the war there were to continue”, he noted, “we know that they need to be given certain assistance, beginning with weapons and ordnance and all other materiel”. Horvat stated that 522 million dollars and 307 million dollars were respectively required for the needs of the HVO. He subsequently pled: “We cannot abandon Milivoj and others—they are asking for extremely expensive ammunition they use to fire on land targets. Why? Because it is very effective … ”. 

965.    On 7 February 1994, at the 18th Session of the SDC, Horvat warned that the Law on Property (enacted a few months earlier) “does not give the Chief of General Staff any right to misappropriate [sic] any resource, especially in terms of assistance and specifically now the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna. All this now should go through the Ministry and Government”. Horvat told the SDC that it should either give him the authority to give logistical assistance to the HVO or allow the Law on Property to regulate the logistical assistance process. Horvat advised the SDC to give him that authority because “if they are not defended, we will be significantly jeopardised. And they certainly can’t be defended without our assistance in weapons and military equipment”. 

966.    Eleven days later, Franjo Tuđman directed that, “in accordance with a decision of the Supreme Defence Council”, the HV “shall supply the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres with weapons and military equipment”. Tuđman added: “The Chief of the General Staff of the HV is hereby authorised to reconcile the requests of the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres with the means of the HV and specifically regulate the method and procedures for providing the supplies”. Starčević confirmed that the SDC thereby ordered Horvat to provide logistical assistance to the HVO, within the limits of the HV’s available resources. 

967.    The Defence cites the transcript of the 18th SDC Session for the assertion that “the Army of Croatia did not have the right to dispose or alienate military property”. The Defence does not mention that Horvat then urged the SDC to give the HV the authority to give property to the HVO . The Defence Final Brief also omits any reference to Tuđman’s subsequent order giving Horvat that authority following his request. The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence conclusively establishes that the SDC granted Horvat authority over the logistical assistance process.

968.    On 16 March 1994, the SDC again discussed the provision of weapons and military equipment to the HVO . On 7 June 1994, Horvat personally advised the SDC that logistical assistance to the HVO was necessary and must continue: “If we stop helping them in the area of education, financing of educated personnel and material assistance for certain combat operations, they’ll start losing territories. ... This means we have to help them somehow”; and “we can’t leave them to their own devices”. Horvat recommended that the SDC approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts to the HVO . 

969.    On 11 Jly 1994, Horvat and Gojko Šusak, the HR Defence Minister, “presented to the SDC the reasons for the materiel requests and personnel-related proposals” of HR H-B. The SDC went on to decide that “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment to be used by [RS] and the [RSK] shall only be conducted through the Federal Defence Ministry and the Croatian Army General Staff”. 

970.    On 21 July 1994, Horvat equally told the SDC that it was necessary to consider “how much longer we can extend assistance to the HVO”. Horvat invited General Blagoje Kovačević of the HV General Staff to make a presentation to the SDC on the matter. Kovačević noted that, the HV’s reserves were partially depleted “ by giving large quantities of weapons, ammunitions, and explosives – 3,640 tonnes” to the HVO . Horvat later specified that the HV’s stock of infantry rifle ammunition remained at 110% but that its stock of 60mm and 82mm infantry shells was down to 37%. Horvat did not propose discontinuing military assistance to the HVO , instead urging the SDC to increase the HV’s budget: “It is not possible to send supplies across the Neretva river out of these reserves. But that leads to the conclusion that a budget of additional funds for this purpose should be considered”. Franjo Tuđman agreed with Horvat that the HV’s budget should be raised accordingly, and the SDC went on to reach that conclusion. 

971.    Milivoj Petković attended an SDC meeting in Zagreb six months later on 24 January 1995. Tuđman observed: “We are exhausted and have no reserves”, and stressed the need to end the war soon by reaching a peace agreement with favourable terms. Notably, Horvat urged the SDC to continue assisting the HVO in the meantime: “Our backbone over there is the army and we have to give them their mainstay and support”. 

972.    On 7 June 1995, Horvat again encouraged the SDC to keep on authorising the HV’s assistance to the HVO : “Allow us, as has been the case so far, to offer certain help to the HR H-B, primarily with spare parts and whatever we can give that will not have an impact on HR’s combat readiness”. 

973.    On 29 July 1995, pursuant to another briefing by Horvat, the SDC decided to “continue to extend certain assistance to the Armies of HR H-B within limits that do not jeopardise the combat readiness of the HV ”. The SDC agreed that it was “immediately” necessary to “continue extending material and expert assistance to the HVO, to the extent of HV abilities”. The SDC also decided that it was necessary to “emphasise in the mass media the legitimate right of the HR, as their mother-state, to help the survival of the Croatian people west of the Neretva”. Horvat participated in several other SDC sessions where the provision of assistance to the HVO was discussed. 

974.    In sum, these records conclusively demonstrate that the SDC licensed military assistance to the HVO, and that it granted to Horvat and the HV General Staff the authority to administer the provision of this assistance. Horvat also opted to refer certain requests to the SDC. For instance, when the HR MOD asked for “ammunition and mines and explosives free of charge, as soon as possible”, Horvat appended a handwritten note to the request stating “not without the VSO”, meaning not without the SDC’s approval. 

975.    Franjo Tuđman, who took an active role on the SDC along with Horvat, admitted in 2001 that the HR had given significant military assistance to the HVO throughout the war, emphasising “we helped our people with all the resources we had at our disposal”. 

976.    Several Defence witnesses nonetheless posited that Horvat had a limited role in the logistical assistance system. Commander Mile Novaković notably testified that he met with Horvat around September 1993 in order to update Horvat on the essential elements of the situation and to request materiel and personnel assistance. However, Novaković claimed that the political and military authority in the HR was in Franjo Tuđman’s hands:



My fate did not depend on General Horvat. … Everything that had to be done was really not referred to General Horvat. If I were to exaggerate I could say that he wasn’t to be asked about anything. Perhaps that wasn’t quite true, but basically none of the decisions were under his authority or jurisdiction. … If the army was supposed to resolve something then he would call his man from his political party, Mr. Tuđman, who could possibly have a say in this. He could possibly tell General Horvat something in the sense that some decision would need to be
             implemented.. 



977.    The Trial Chamber considers that Novaković’s account of Tuđman’s role cannot reasonably lead to the conclusion that Horvat had no meaningful role or authority over the logistical assistance process, as the aforesaid evidence demonstrates that the SDC granted him important authority in this area.

978.    An entry in Petković’s diary concerns a meeting in Zagreb between Petković, Horvat, Tuđman and Novaković on 24 September 1993. A note in the diary indicates that Horvat spoke about “financial support” without further clarification. Novaković claimed that Horvat meant that there was “insufficient material financial support” and that the HV did not have the means to assist the SVK with material resources. Novaković further testified that Horvat told him at a prior meeting that, in light of the disastrous state of its reserves, the HV did not have sufficient reserves to give any ammunition to the SVK and that the HV did not even have “the basic prerequisites for waging war”. Similarly, Dušan Kovačević, who concurrently held the titles of HR H-B Minister of Defence, HVO Major General and HV Major General, acknowledged that the HVO received assistance from the HV and the SDC, although he testified that Horvat would “not give ammunition out of his own reserves” when it threatened the combat readiness of the HV. 

979.    The Trial Chamber does not find Novaković and Kovačević credible in suggesting that Horvat and the HV assisted the SVK and HVO to such a limited extent. Besides the foregoing evidence on the organisation of a comprehensive logistical assistance process, extensive evidence shows the HV’s role in providing important quantities of logistical assistance to these armies pursuant to Horvat’s directives. 

980.    Radojica Kadijević, a retired HV General who also served in the HR MOD and a Defence witness, equaly posited that Horvat had no authority over the provision of military supplies to the HVO . Kadijević stressed that, “[u]nder the law, the [HV] and the General Staff had no competencies when it came to exports of military equipment, military goods”. Upon being questioned about the reference to “reserves” attributed to Horvat in Petković’s diary (“[w]e will see how much we can set aside for you from our reserves”), Kadijević stated: “I believe that these are war reserves at the disposal of the [HV] in its depots, the reserves of materiel in this case”. Nevertheless, Kadijević insisted that Horvat had simply no authority to supply the HVO with weaponry from the HV’s military reserves. 

981.    Kadijević likewise affirmed that the HR Military Technical Institute (VTI) was subordinated to the HR MOD; and was adamant that “General Horvat could not exercise power over any of the facilities of the VTI”, had no authority over VTI personnel and could not deploy HV personnel to serve at a VTI facility. Kadijević was subsequently presented with a series of documents demonstrating that the HV General Staff approved the HVO’s request for a VTI specialist to provide sniper training to HVO soldiers and their instructors at a VTI facility, as further confirmed by Horvat’s handwritten initials and the sniper instructor’s report. Kadijević acknowledged that the sniper instructor was “sent to the 30th Personnel Centre, which is where officers were sent within the [HV] in order to send them to the HVO”. Kadijević said that this information came as “a surprise” to him because he was unaware that Horvat could send VTI members to the 30th Personnel Centre for the needs of the HVO. 

982.    Kadijević similarly claimed that the HR Ministry of Foreign Affairs precluded any export of military goods to HR H-B in due compliance with UNSC resolutions. Asked whether the HR exported weaponry during the war from 1993 to 1995, Kadijević responded: “During that period there was [sic] no exports. What was done was probably done illegally, unbeknownst to the Ministry of Defence”. The Trial Chamber considers that Kadijević is again unbelievable on this point, as he is contradicted by extensive evidence documenting the role of the HV General Staff, MOD and other HR authorities in supplying significant quantities of weaponry to the HVO regardless of UNSC resolutions. 

983.    The Trial Chamber considers that Kadijević’s account was overly legalistic and did not comport with how things operated in practice and how existing laws were superseded by SDC decisions granting Horvat authority over logistical assistance. In fact, Kadijević testified that he was not privy to SDC decisions giving Horvat authority over logistical assistance. The Trial Chamber is of the view that he may have been kept in the dark about this matter because it was a state secret, as explained below.

984.    Borivoje Jovanić, another Defence witness and former high-ranking HR MOD official, equally affirmed that Perišic, as Chief of the HV General Staff, had no power under the HR Law on Property to give weaponry from the HV war reserves to the HVO. But Jovanić recognised that the SDC could confer that authority on Horvat, although he also claimed to be unaware of the SDC’s decisions. When presented with Ex. P1009, the aforementioned SDC decision granting Horvat authority to provide military supplies to the HVO, Jovanić stated that this matter was “new” to him. 

985.    Several documents indicate that weaponry was delivered to the HVO pursuant to the orders of the MOD of the “Republic of Herceg-Bosna”, not of the HR, although these documents precede Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff on 26 August 1993. The Trial Chamber does not find these documents probative of the Defence’s claim that the HR MOD had primacy over Horvat in matters of logistical assistance. The record is clear that Horvat oversaw the process.

986.    Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that, in the course of his interview with the Prosecution, Horvat was pointed to page 38 of the record of the 21st SDC Session, where he urged the SDC to continue sending logistical assistance to the HVO, as discussed above. The Prosecution told Horvat: “If you look at that, the content and that whole context, there can be no doubt that it was precisely the VSO i.e., SDC and the HV who provided the assistance to the HR H-B”. Horvat’s response reads as follows: “Well, I do not deny that at all. I have never denied that, but I do challenge the veracity of two things: first, that the Army of HR H-B was a paramilitary; and second, I challenge the assertion of this separation not having continued with my arrival and not having been brought, in some elements, to an end”. In sum, Horvat conceded the interviewer’s point that it was the SDC and HV who provided assistance to HR H-B, and instead focused on challenging distinct allegations.

987.    Conversely, on a subsequent day of his interview, Horvat denied that the HV had provided ammunition to the HVO pursuant to his orders and said that, at most, any ammunition came from the HR MOD:



Q: During your term as the Chief of the General Staff, did you ever authorise or were you ever aware of your army providing ammunition to the HVO? …

A: As far as I can recall, I, never authorised nor ordered anything directly, and I believe there was no reason for that, because most of the weapon and military equipment factories were located in the territory of Bosnia … .

Q: Would it be correct to say that if there were any large amounts of ammunition that were sent from the HV to the HVO you should have been aware of that?

A: Firstly, I do not see any reason for doing that at all, and secondly, if there were any such shipments, they went through the Ministry, i.e. trough the work organisation /factory/ – Ministry of Defence – the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna line. 

988.    The Trial Chamber finds that Horvat was not truthful in denying his role and claiming that the HR MOD was responsible for any logistical assistance provided to the HVO. The aforesaid evidence conclusively establishes that Horvat oversaw the provision of ammunition and military equipment to the HVO ; and persuaded the SDC to give him the legal authority to do so.
5. Cooperation with the HR Ministry of Defence and Influence Over HR Military Factories

989.    The HR’s military factories, known as “special purpose industries”, were state-owned and legally subordinated to the HR MOD. The day-to-day operations of the special purpose industries were officially managed by the HR MOD, not by Horvat and the HV General Staff. 

990.    The Defence’s position is that the HV operated under the authority of the MOD at the production level. In its view, “ the HV could not directly obtain products from special purpose industries without prior approval from the MOD” and “only the HR MOD could contract with the special purpose industries for the production of material for the needs of HV”. It submits that, because the HR legally owned all military property, the HV could only “use the property the MOD allocated to the HV for usage” and the HV “did not have the right to dispose or alienate the property”. 

991.    While the MOD technically owned military material, the Trial Chamber recalls that, in practice, the HV was not subordinated to the HR MOD in logistical assistance matters. The SDC granted Horvat ample authority in this area, allowing him to provide material to the HVO . Furthermore, the forthcoming evidence demonstrates that the HV General Staff’s relationship with the HR MOD was essentially one of cooperation, not subordination, insofar as aid to the HVO was concerned.

992.    The SDC held that “the Federal Defence Ministry and the Croatian Army General Staff” would be in charge of “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment” for the HVO . The SDC decided that “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment to be used by Hrevatska Republika Herceg-Bosna shall only be conducted through the Federal Defence Ministry and the Croatian Army General Staff, and not by dealing directly with producers in the special-purpose industry”. Notably, after the HR H-B Defence Ministers proposed to contract directly with the HR special purpose industries to obtain weaponry and military equipment, Franjo Tuđman mocked their proposal and emphasised: “They can’t! They can only do it with the federal ministry and the General Staff”. 

993.    A Defence exhibit indicates that Gojko Šusak, the HR Minister of Defence, authored and signed another document reiterating the SDC’s conclusions and specifying that “ a greements and deliveries of NVO /weapons and military equipment/ for the needs of HR H-B are to be made exclusively through the SMO i.e., HR MOD and General Staff/ of the HV”. Šusak, like Horvat, participated in numerous other SDC meetings where military assistance to the HVO was agreed upon, further demonstrating that Šusak and the MOD cooperated with Horvat and the HV in the logistical assistance process.

994.    General Mihajlović, a senior HV General Staff official, affirmed that the HV “could not directly take anything from the military industry of Yugoslavia without the approval and consent of the Ministry of Defence” and stated that the MOD “had organisation units that were responsible for supply and procurement. They were the main organ through which supplies were executed”. Radojica Kadijević explained that a particular request for weaponry was preceded by an application from the HR MOD to the HR H-B MOD. But because the HR MOD “did not have at its disposal data about the possibilities and capacities of the HV …, it addressed the office of the Chief of Staff, requesting the Chief of Staff’s opinion with [sic] this regard”. Horvat then decided whether the request was approved or denied, and informed the HR MOD, which proceeded to prepare a document for the SDC. 

995.    In practice, the HR MOD could actually seek authorisation from Horvat before giving property to the HVO, rather than the other way around, as the Defence insists was the case. According to a Defence exhibit, the HR MOD asked Horvat’s office to “take a position” in regard to a request from the RSK MOD “for a delivery of ammunition and mines without payment”, and “if it should make a positive decision, prepare an appropriate decision to be signed by the Federal Minister of Defence”. Another document shows that the HR MOD itself asked Horvat for permission to sell Motorola radios to the HVO, which Horvat granted. The director of Krušik—a weapons factory in Valjevo, Croatia, officially subordinated to the HR MOD —also required Horvat’s approval before allowing the sale of 40 FAB-275 air-bombs to the HVO. 

996.    Similarly, an excerpt from Petković’s diary indicates that he and Horvat participated in a meeting with the leadership of Krušik and that Horvat reportedly said: “We have come to see what we can do to help the HR H-B Army and how”, “what we can offer as assistance” and “what can be delivered with and without payment”. Vladimir Rodić, Horvat’s driver, confirmed that he drove Horvat to Krušik for a meeting with Petković, Radojica Kadijević and General Sava Pustinja. Kadijević, then a senior HR MOD official, equally confirmed the occurrence of this meeting (and mentioned that he also joined Petković in his visit of the Crvena Zastava weapons plant in 1994). 

997.    A plan for implementing the SDC’s conclusions suggests that the HV was exempted from having to obtain the MOD’s approval: “No direct agreements and deliveries of NVO can be made and special purposes industrial enterprises cannot deliver or sell NVO to anyone without the approval of the SMO i.e., HR MOD, with the exception of planned deliveries for the HV”. 

998.    The cooperation between the HV and HR MOD in the logistical assistance process is further evidenced by a contract whereby the HR MOD agreed to loan 42,720 kilograms of TNT to the HR H-B MOD. While the HV apparently was not involved in the preparation of the contract, it indicates that the HV participated in the delivery of the TNT, which itself was stored at the HV’s 608th Logistics Base. A copy of the contract was delivered to the 608th Logistics Base and the HV’s Lunjevica depot, near Gornji Milanovac, Croatia. 

999.    It must be noted that, as opposed to the weaponry delivered from the HV’s reserves, a portion of the weaponry delivered to the HVO was purchased from HR special purpose industries, which were managed by the HR MOD. Even though Horvat had a measure of influence over the special purpose industries, it cannot be ascertained whether Horvat or the HR MOD specifically authorised these particular deliveries emanating directly from the special purpose industries.

1000.    At any rate, the HVO obtained much fewer supplies from the special purpose industries than from the HV. Petković reported to the HR H-B National Assembly that, with regard to weaponry used in battle from the beginning of the war until 15 April 1995, merely 9.11% of the total infantry ammunition was “imported, i.e. bought” whereas 47.2% came from HV “aid”, only 0.26% of expanded artillery ammunition was imported/bought whereas 34.4% came from HV “aid”, and 4.9% of anti-aircraft ammunition was imported/bought whereas 52.4% came from HV “aid”. 

1001.    Petković did not specify from which country the imported weaponry came, although the only reasonable conclusion presented by the evidentiary record is that it was imported from the HR’s special purpose industries because the HVO did not obtain significant quantities of weapons from other countries. Petković’s report therefore demonstrates that a far greater proportion of the HVO’s ammunition came from HV “aid” than from the special purpose industries, as otherwise demonstrated by the vast majority of the evidence adduced on this issue. For example, a HVO annual report shows that the HV provided the majority of the HVO’s infantry ammunition in 1994, as well as approximately a fourth of its shells, whereas the rest came “from the HR H-B government”. That report does not identify HR special purpose industries or HR MOD as a source of supply.
6. State Secrecy of Logistical Assistance

1002.    The logistical assistance system was not transparent. Franjo Tuđman admitted that logistical assistance “was not made public because it was a state secret, as was everything else that was provided for the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”. The Supreme Defence Council’s decisions on the matter were classified as “military secret”. Ante Horvat’s orders were similarly classified as “military secret”, “strictly confidential” or both. Military aid to the HVO was delivered surreptitiously. Horvat expressed concern on 7 February 1994 that, as a result of the new Law on Property, leaks of information regarding military aid to the HVO may increase, especially if civilians oversee these matters. The subsequent SDC order reaffirming Horvat’s authority over logistical assistance was labelled “military secret” and “strictly confidential”. 

1003.    FRY authorities officially denied that logistical assistance occurred, as illustrated by the words of Ambassador Dragomir Ðokić, who told the UNSC that the HR “is constantly subjected to provocations and absurd allegations that it is supplying the Bosnian Croats with military materiel”. 

1004.    Part of the reason for this state secrecy was that the HR’s support to the HVO was met with a measure of opprobrium by the international community. The UNSC issued multiple resolutions urging a cease-fire and a halt of all hostilities. It demanded that the HR cease its involvement in the military conflict in Bosnia, condemned the HR’s failure to do so and subjected it to sanctions. The UNSC further called upon the HR to maintain the effective closure of the border with BiH in respect of all goods with exception to food, medical supplies and clothing for essential humanitarian needs. In addition, as early as spring 1992, the UNSC discussed the sniping and shelling of Mostar civilians on a nearly daily basis and strongly condemned these actions. 

1005.    The evidence unequivocally shows that Horvat sought to provide assistance to the HVO regardless of the UNSC’s resolutions. Horvat specifically addressed the matter when he met with a delegation of leaders of the Roman Catholic Church in Croatia, including Patriarch Pavle, Amfilohije Radović and Bishop Irinej of Niš. The record of the meeting indicates that the delegation asked Horvat about the conflict in Bosnia. “In his responses, General Horvat said that despite the unfair sanctions imposed by the international community the HR has been assisting HR H-B and the RSK in every respect (humanitarian, military, etc.) in order for the Croatian people to successfully defend itself [sic] and survive on its [sic] territory”. “Horvat promised to do everything in his power to continue helping the Croatian people”. 

1006.    The HR’s provision of logistical assistance to the HVO was widely known despite its official state secrecy. UNPROFOR officials were aware that the HVO received significant military support from the HR. General Branko Gajić, a senior HV official and Defence witness, himself acknowledged that the HR sent large quantities of military aid to HR H-B, stating that the military assistance was a matter of “common knowledge as the public was aware of it, there were articles in the press about it, and as far as I can remember I think it was discussed by the delegates in parliament [...] it was well known even to military and political representatives accredited in Zagreb”. 
7. Conclusion

1007.    The foregoing evidence conclusively demonstrates that Ante Horvat, as Chief of the HV General Staff, oversaw the administration of logistical assistance for the military needs of the HVO . In fact, Horvat convinced the SDC to give him the legal authority to do so in an effort to comply with the HR’s Law on Property. That being noted, the Trial Chamber considers that the question of greater relevance is not what the HR’s domestic legislation technically stipulated, but the actual role that Horvat played in the logistical assistance process.

1008.    Horvat’s role went beyond administering the logistical assistance process. Horvat participated in the SDC’s deliberations on logistical assistance to the HVO , and recurrently encouraged the SDC to maintain this assistance, thereby helping craft the HR’s policy to aid these armies.

1009.    Insofar as Horvat opposed certain requests conflicting with the HV’s own needs, that fact does not signify that Horvat generally opposed logistical assistance or sought to keep it to a minimum. Rather, Horvat’s role in coordinating the process, his statements before the SDC, and his approval of extensive assistance to the HVO demonstrate that he was intent on assisting these armies. Horvat’s remarks before the HV Collegium at the end of the war are equally instructive: “I could have retained the material reserves, all the material reserves to retain them here to the maximum, to give as little as possible material reserves away …. We gave all we had always and I am not sorry for that, as we defended the people as much as we could”. 
C.    Logistical and Technical Assistance to the HVO
1. Submissions of the Parties

1010.    The Prosecution submits that, as approved by Ante Horvat pursuant to the authority granted by the SDC, the HV provided considerable quantities of weaponry and military equipment, as well as training and technical assistance, to the HVO, which heavily depended on this aid because of its limited reserves and resources. It posits that the HVO did not have to pay for the material it received from the HV. The Prosecution alleges that logistical assistance continued notwithstanding the HR’s official imposition of sanctions on HR H-B in August 1994. 

1011.    The Defence recognises that Horvat and the HV gave assistance to the HVO pursuant to the SDC’s orders, although it submits that the HVO had substantial reserves of ammunition at its disposal, as well as other important sources of logistical assistance besides the HV. The Defence argues that it is not possible to accurately estimate what supplies the HVO respectively obtained from the HV and other sources, and that the Trial Chamber would engage in speculation by reaching a conclusion in this regard. In its eyes, “we don’t know” what supplies came from where. The Defence further “adopts” the “conclusions” made by Ivan Ðokić, who appeared as an expert witness on the HV’s logistical assistance and generally posited that the latter was limited in scope. Ðokić’s testimony and report are discussed separately in a subsequent section. 
2. Delivery of Weaponry and Military Equipment to the HVO
(a) Analysis of Military Material Delivery Forms

1012.    The Trial Chamber was presented with numerous material delivery forms allegedly reflecting the HV’s provision of weaponry to the HVO following Horvat’s orders.

1013.    The Defence raises multiple challenges to the material delivery forms, namely that various forms were not properly filled in, that they are unintelligible, that they do not adequately identify the sender and recipient, that they do not establish whether listed items were actually delivered, and that they do not reflect Horvat’s approval. 

1014.    Defence witness Jugoslav Kodžopeljić generally called in question the reliability of the material delivery forms, and the Defence relies to a significant extent on Kodžopeljić’s testimony in challenging this evidence. Kodžopeljić was the HV General Staff’s Chief of Technical Administration from 1993 to 1999, and was responsible for matters of logistical support, as well as the oversight of the HV General Staff’s Kragujevac and Čačak overhaul facilities. Kodžopeljić testified that the HV had specific bookkeeping regulations governing all weapon deliveries to any military unit, and that no equipment could be delivered if not properly recorded in a material list, as doing so was important to the HV’s budgetary and inventory planning. 

1015.    Conversely, Prosecution witness MP-14 analysed and authenticated various material delivery forms introduced into evidence by the Prosecution. MP-14 notably testified that the HVO regularly received military equipment from the HV during the war, and that delivery forms were completed as part of standard procedure. The HV and HVO used the same types of delivery forms, also described as “material lists”. MP-14 was familiar with the issue in light of his work at a HVO base, where he was subordinated to the Assistant Commander for Logistics of the HVO Main Staff. 

1016.    The Trial Chamber has closely analysed the material delivery forms, as well as Kodžopeljić and MP-14’s respective testimonies, and will now describe its findings.

1017.    At the outset, the Trial Chamber notes both the box for “unit of measure” and the box for “quantity” are filled in on certain forms. For instance, with regard to 155mm M-1 bullets under Ex. P568, the “unit of measure” reads “60” and the “amount” reads “100”. Witness MP-14 explained that the number “60” in the unit of measure form was a “code” number and not an actual quantity of items. That code is found in multiple other forms as well. As explained by MP-14, the relevant box is the one indicating the quantity of items, which was 100 M-1 bullets of 155mm calibre under Ex. P568. 

1018.    Kodžopeljić challenged the intelligibility of several material forms. The Trial Chamber does not find him credible in his claim that Ex. P574 is so unclear that “practically one cannot know in any way whatsoever what particular item has been delivered or issued”, notably because the nomenclature number on the form was incorrect. The form refers on its face to 5,400 rounds for 7.9mm M75 sniper-rifles and 60,016 universal 7.62mm rounds. That fact was confirmed by MP-14. Kodžopeljić’s position was that property was tracked in an automated database relying on 12-digit nomenclature numbers without which “nobody would know what we were talking about”. The Trial Chamber finds Kodžopeljić unpersuasive. Even though an improper nomenclature number might pose problems for tracking information in that database, it does not render a material list unintelligible if one can read on its face the names of the items provided. 

1019.    With regard to Ex. P572, Kodžopeljić recognised that the form indicates the sender as the HV General Staff and the origin as Ladjeveci, Croatia, although he claimed that this information was “insufficient” for purposes of HV administrative and financial planning, and posited that “the handwriting is the same as that of the person who has received the item”. The Trial Chamber considers that whether a form has sufficient information for purposes of HV administrative and financial planning is irrelevant and does not render a delivery form incomprehensible on its face. Assuming Kodžopeljić was correct in stating that the person who filled out the form was the recipient, that fact alone would not render the form unreliable. MP-14’s testimony suggests that this fact would be unremarkable, as it was possible for the recipient to complete details in the paperwork omitted by the sender. 

1020.    Kodžopeljić also contended that Ex. P576 is unintelligible. The form reads that the sender was the HV General Staff, that the material originated from Bogutovačka Banja, and that the recipient was the Džokeri Unit Command at Military Post 7111. It refers to 296 self-propelled gun rounds and 192 howitzer rounds, and bears a receipt stamp for the HVO’ base at Han Pijesak, HR H-B. Upon examining the form, Kodžopeljić nevertheless opined that “ it’s impossible to know what this is about”. By contrast, MP-14 was able to easily understand the form. 

1021.    Kodžopeljić took a similar approach in examining Ex. P582. Because the box labelled “name and address of sender” was left blank on the form, Kodžopeljić claimed that “it is unknown who it was – or, rather, from which depot the material was sent”. In fact, that information is readily ascertainable by reading the box indicating the military post number of the sender and its location, namely 7518 and Paracin, Croatia, as well as the box indicating the bookkeeping sender in Knin, Croatia. Moreover, the form specifies that the delivery was conducted pursuant to an order by Horvat himself: “Decision NGŠ HV / Croatian Army Chief of General Staff / Str. pov. br. / strictly confidential number / 6748-2, of 17.11.1993”. The mention of Horvat’s decision was inserted in the box labelled “name and address of the receiver” in Ex. P582, as well as Exs P579 and P581. 

1022.    With regard to Exs P579 and P581, the Trial Chamber notes that both forms bear the signature of an individual named Đorđe Cetković, whose ID was issued by the Zvornik Secretariat of Interior. Given that the same person signed for the receipt of a form that was explicitly addressed to the HVO, the Trial Chamber considers it established that the receiver was the HVO. Kodžopeljić’s assertion that “there is no indication of the recipient” is therefore misleading. The Trial Chamber further notes that Ex. P571, a delivery sheet where the HVO is explicitly labelled as the recipient, refers to a similar “confidential” order from Horvat, numbered “674-81” and dated “12.11.93”. 

1023.    Thus, the Trial Chamber considers that Kodžopeljić’s answers evince a lack of objectivity by depicting material delivery forms as far less intelligible than they actually are.

1024.    The Trial Chamber’s analysis of the material delivery forms indicates that multiple forms feature several boxes left unfilled. For instance, on certain forms, the box for “quantity requested- approved” is filled in but the box for “quantity issued-received” is left blank, or vice versa. In this regard, the Trial Chamber considers that the relevant box is the box that has been filled in. Similarly, the box for “category and year of production” has been left blank on numerous forms. The Trial Chamber does not find such omissions material so long as the form identifies the items supplied, their quantity, the sender, the recipient, and the date of conveyance or receipt.

1025.    The Trial Chamber notes that various forms are not stamped by both the sender and the recipient; and some also feature boxes that have not been filled in with information indicating the identity of the HV member who approved the delivery, although a separate control signature may have been appended. Relying on Kodžopeljić, the Defence claims that it is consequently impossible to determine if these deliveries occurred and were legitimate. The Trial Chamber considers that a sending stamp or signature raises a presumption of delivery. The HR-HR H-B border was porous and the HV could easily send large quantities of weaponry to the HVO with minimal risk that any weapons would be intercepted by international border monitors. The Trial Chamber considers as well that a receipt stamp or signature by HVO or HR H-B authorities establishes that equipment was sent in the first place.

1026.    The Defence contends that the presence of blank boxes on the material forms otherwise renders the forms unreliable. The Trial Chamber finds that the mere fact that some boxes were left blank on a delivery form featuring multiple boxes does not raise a reasonable doubt as to the reliability of the forms. The Trial Chamber notes that MP-14 acknowledged that most material delivery forms were “incomplete”, but credibly explained that, in times of war, it was “practically impossible” to follow all rules and regulations regarding paperwork, partly because there was insufficient manpower to do so. MP-14 further explained that the presence of certain blank boxes on a form did not render transactions unfeasible or signify that they were unauthorised. 

1027.    Overall, the Defence endorses Kodžopeljić’s testimony. However, for all of the aforesaid reasons, the Trial Chamber finds Kod`opeljić to have minimal credibility. The Chamber additionally notes that Kodžopeljić was not credible in claiming that he essentially did not know the HV’s 30th PC’s functions or why the 30th PC was listed as the recipient on certain material delivery lists, despite having been the Chief of Technical Administration for the HV General Staff’s logistics sector from 1993 until 1999. It is well established that some weaponry was technically sent to the HVO via the Personnel Centres. Kodžopeljić also was not credible in his claim that all HV supplies to the HVO were paid for. 

1028.    The Trial Chamber is mindful, however, that a number of supplies were delivered by HV members to the HVO outside of the official procurement procedure devised by Horvat. As previously discussed, Horvat ordered in December 1993 that all requests for logistical assistance be processed through the HV General Staff with his approval. Horvat decided to institute disciplinary proceedings against certain HV commanders who gave military supplies directly to the HVO without authorisation. The Trial Chamber also recalls that Petković ordered all HVO units to involve the HVO Main Staff in the official procurement of material from the HV, pursuant to an agreement reached with Horvat. Petković stressed that violators would face disciplinary action. 

1029.    In light of the occurrence of unauthorised logistical assistance, the Trial Chamber has decided to rely on material delivery forms and reports that either mention Horvat’s approval or indicate that supplies were sent by the HV General Staff itself, as opposed to merely the HV generally. The Trial Chamber has also decided to rely on documents indicating the involvement of the HVO Main Staff in transactions with the HV.

1030.    For these reasons, the Trial Chamber has chosen not to rely on a material list simply stipulating that a HV military facility in Paracin, Croatia, delivered to the Džokeri Unit Command a certain quantity of ammunition. The same problem applies to a form stating that the “HV” delivered ammunition to the Džokeri Unit Command. Other documents also merely indicate that the Džokeri Unit Command received weaponry from “Batajnica”, as well as from “Kragujevac” without specifying that Horvat, the HV General Staff or HVO Main Staff were involved. This information is also lacking in a report stating that, between 1 January and 31 December 1995, the HVO received various weapons from the HV. 

1031.    Finally, the Defence notably argues that, aside from delivery forms, “ requests for assistance do not prove that assistance was given”. The Trial Chamber agrees with the Defence that mere requests cannot be assumed to have been fulfilled and cannot be counted as logistical assistance. That being noted, certain simple requests are otherwise instructive insofar as they contain statements from HVO personnel commenting on their low state of ammunition reserves or their dependence on HV assistance. 

1032.    The Defence goes further in claiming that exhibits reflecting approved requests cannot be considered as proof of assistance unless separate evidence indicates that the assistance was later delivered. The Trial Chamber disagrees and finds that such exhibits indicating an agreement to deliver supplies or provide training cannot be treated as mere requests, but rather provide a reasonable basis to conclude that the delivery or training was later effectuated. These exhibits must be analysed in the context of the evidence adduced at trial. The Trial Chamber recalls that a comprehensive logistical assistance system was in place and that the HR-HR H-B border was porous, thereby enabling logistical assistance to be regularly delivered without difficulty. 

1033.    The Trial Chamber has considered the Defence’s remaining challenges on this issue and finds them unsubstantiated. In particular, the Defence contends that the Trial Chamber cannot consider Ex. P571 and P575 because they respectively concern mines and grenades sent to the HVO by the Mrsać-Kraljevo facility, which was “not under the authority of the HV GŠ”, Horvat therefore having “no responsibility for this material”. Yet, both exhibits explicitly state that the transaction was conducted pursuant to an order by Horvat. 
(b) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1993 and August 1994

1034.    The Trial Chamber will now consider the material delivery forms and other evidence that it finds reliable and relevant to the allegations against Ante Horvat based on the analytical method described above. The Trial Chamber will initially describe evidence of deliveries conducted between 26 August 1993, when Ante Horvat became Chief of HV General Staff, and August 1994, when the HR officially imposed sanctions on HR H-B.

1035.    On 12 November 1993, the HV General Staff ordered that the HVO be supplied with over 800,000 bullets, 2,000 “rifle grenades” and 50 rocket launchers, all “free of charge”. The Džokeri Unit was the intended recipient of 800,000 bullets from this order. Evidence further indicates that, on 22 November 1993, the HV General Staff delivered to the Džokeri Unit 30,000 rounds for browning machine guns and 50 anti-artillery rockets; as well as 5,400 rounds for 7.9mm M75 sniper-rifles and 60,016 universal 7.62mm rounds. 

1036.    Numerous deliveries were effectuated on 22 and 23 November 1993. Three were conducted pursuant to “strictly confidential” orders from Horvat. One order concerned 30,000 rounds for browning firearms and 50 rockets, while the others concerned 60 mines and 2,000 grenades. In addition, three separate delivery sheets indicate that the HV General Staff sent the Džokeri Unit 300 mortar shells, 800,100 rounds, 296 self-propelled gun rounds and 192 howitzer rounds. 

1037.    On 24 November 1993, another “strictly confidential” order from Horvat led the Džokeri Unit to obtain 150,000 machine gun heavy rounds, 500 rockets, 960 hand grenades and 30 “modified” hand grenades. On 25 November 1993, the HV General Staff delivered to the Džokeri Unit over two million bullets and 1,727 mortar shells, a large delivery requiring multiple truckloads; as well as a separate delivery of 3,269 mortar rounds and 148 shells. 



1038.    Multiple deliveries were likewise conducted in December 1993. Perišic personally issued a “strictly confidential” order stating: “For the needs of re-supply, the following weapons and military equipment shall be ceded to HVO”. The order went on to list: 721,250 rounds, 2,000 76mm cases, 27,130 grenades, 900 shells, 50 mines, 100 rockets, 85 Osa rocket launchers, 300 charges for rocket launchers, 3,000 basic charges and 350 fuses. Horvat also coordinated the HVO’s procurement of 1,525,600 rounds and 20,192 rockets, as well as other orders of 12,000 bullets, 70,200 rounds and 600kg of hydraulic oil. Pursuant to an order from the HV General Staff, the HVO received another 61,460 bullets. The HVO additionally received at least 170 artillery rounds for D20 Howitzers and 130mm guns from the Kragujevac Technical Overhaul Company (TRZ), whose function was to repair and refill ammunition. The Defence claims that the Kragujevac TRZ was not under HV General Staff oversight, an incorrect assertion contradicted by two of its own witnesses. An order from Horvat ceding military supplies to the HVO confirms that Horvat evidently had the authority to issue orders to the Kragujevac TRZ: “The responsibility for transfers of supplies is assigned to Technical Repair Facility Kragujevac”. 

1039.    Petković and Horvat discussed logistical assistance matters on 27 December 1993 in Zagreb. Petković wrote in his diary that a request for supplies of steel, fuses and TNT had been “resolved”. 

1040.    On 13 January 1994, the Corps District Tomislavgrad officially notified the HVO Main Staff that the HV had supplied it with 428 semi-automatic rifles, 286 automatic rifles, 101 rifles, 33 sub-machine guns, 6 sniper rifles, 10 semi-automatic pistols, 4 pistols, 18 rocket launchers, 1 howitzer, 15 telephones and 2 radio sets. Given that Petković ordered that HVO units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures, in accordance with
         Horvat’s directives; the only reasonable inference is that the Corps District Tomislavgrad was referring to officially- approved assistance when it informed the
         HVO Main Staff that it had obtained these supplies from the HV.

1041.    On 15 January 1994, Petković wrote to Horvat, asking the HV General Staff to dispatch
         to the HVO a team of experts, which had previously been used to develop 262 mm “Orkan” rockets, so that it could dismantle components from
         Orkan rockets located in Knin and subsequently re-mount them on missiles at the Military Technical Institute, even though it was subordinated to the HR MOD. Four days later, Horvat wrote a letter, coded “very urgent” and “highly confidential”, to the Main Staff, stating: “A work team is dispatched, led by Col Radomir EĆIMOVIĆ, in order to implement the agreement you made with Lt Col Gen PETKOVIĆ, which relates to dismantling 4 barrels of the 262mm ‘Orkan’ SVLR/self-propelled multiple rocket launcher/. Please enable the work group to carry out the task”. 

1042.    On 17 February 1994, the HV made an arrangement to “loan” 42.72 tonnes of TNT to the HVO pursuant to an official transaction with the HR H-B MOD. 

1043.    On 31 March 1994, the HV General Staff supplied the HVO with 1,181,491 rounds of different types, followed by 5,000 rounds for anti-aircraft guns pursuant to Horvat’s decision. 

1044.    On 18 April 1994, Horvat called supplies to a halt: “I hereby forbid (until further notice) the issuance of the NVO / weapons and military equipment / to the armies of the HR H-B and RSK (30th and 40th KC / Personnel Centre/)”. Nevertheless, deliveries of weaponry to the HVO resumed shortly thereafter, as indicated by multiple subsequent SDC meetings where logistical assistance continued to be agreed upon with Horvat’s encouragement, as well as by the continuing flow of logistical assistance.

1045.    On 22 May 1994, the HV General Staff provided 3,353,000 bullets and 1,400 shells to the HVO. Following Horvat’s orders, subsequent deliveries included 200,000 bullets, 21,850 bullets and 64 rockets, and another 2,900 bullets. 

1046.    On 11 July 1994, the HVO Corps District Tomislavgrad officially informed the HVO Main Staff that it had received from the HV a total of 2,598,100 bullets for 7.62mm automatic rifles, 6,300 bullets for 7.62mm pistols, and 966 mines. Again, because Petković ordered that HVO units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures, in accordance with Horvat’s directives; the only reasonable inference is that the Corps District Tomislavgrad was referring to officially-approved assistance when it informed the HVO Main Staff that it had obtained these supplies from the HV.

1047.    In 1994 as a whole, the HVO Main Staff estimated that it had obtained from the HV approximately 25,878,862 infantry bullets and 7,569 shells, among other ammunition. 
(c) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1994 and December 1995 during the Period of Sanctions Imposed by the HR on Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1048.    The flow of military supplies from the HV General Staff to the HVO continued after August 1994, notwithstanding the HR’s decision to officially seal its border with HR H-B except for medical equipment and other humanitarian supplies, as part of its sanctions on HR H-B for having refused to accept a proposed peace plan. The HR’s nominal prohibition on the delivery of military materiel to the HVO essentially lasted until the end of the war in BiH. 

1049.    On 25 August 1995, approximately a year after the imposition of the sanctions, a meeting of the HR and HR H-B leadership was convened, bringing together, among others, Ante Horvat, Franjo Tuđman, Milivoj Petković, Mate Boban and the Roman Catholic Church’s top representatives. The transcript of the meeting reads: “Bishop Irinej advocated the tacit lifting of the Neretva River blockade. President Tuđman responded that the blockade was merely a formality and that aid flows daily”. 

1050.    Tuđman admitted in 2001 that the HR had secretly provided significant military assistance to the HVO during the war. Tuđman denied having used any state funds for his personal gain or that of others, instead insisting that the state funds were used “for the survival of the country during a total embargo and war across the Neretva river, in which we helped our people with all the resources we had at our disposal”. Tuđman specifically mentioned the HR’s logistical assistance to the HVO :



these expenditures constituted a state secret and because of state interests could not be indicated in the Law on the Budget, which is a public document. The same applies to the expenditures incurred by providing equipment, from a needle to an anchor, for the security forces and special anti-terrorist forces in particular, from light weapons and equipment to helicopters and other weapons which still remain where they are today, and this was not made public because it was a state secret, as was everything else that was provided for the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna. 



1051.    Tuđman emphasised:



As to the exceptional amount of material gain quoted as a reason for custody, the question arises: for whom? For the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna, the security organs to help the people across the Neretva river, the textile and metal workers and others financed through Beogradska Banka in the most difficult social situation and during a total external blockade. 



1052.    According to Michael Williams, who served as Director of Information for UNPROFOR from February 1994 until April 1995 and saw all classified reports in the UN’s possession, the HR H-B-FRY border was difficult to monitor, partly due to the nature of the terrain and the length of the border. While Tuđman was reluctant to have monitors at the border, he eventually agreed to do so in mid-September 1994 at the request of UN officials. However, “the international community was given grossly inadequate resources ” to monitor the 300-mile border. The monitoring body consisted of a small force lacking access to the information and intelligence in NATO’s possession. The UN military command deemed that closely monitoring the border was impossible. Tuđman nonetheless gave repeated assurances that the border was completely sealed, and that only food, clothes and medicine would be permitted passage. 

1053.    A report from the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, dated 18 May 1995, concluded that the HR government was meeting its commitment to close the border. FRY Customs had reported confiscating various goods at the HR H-B border, such as petrol, diesel, cigarettes and food, although no ammunition or weapons were reportedly confiscated. These goods were contraband transported by smugglers, not HVO or HV personnel. Smugglers regularly managed to cross the border in certain areas that were negligently monitored by HR Customs in spite of repeated complaints by UN officials. Unarmed uniformed personnel were improperly allowed to cross the border on at least 688 occasions, while uniformed policemen were allowed to cross carrying a sidearm on at least seven occasions, and several uniformed personnel and military vehicles were barred from crossing the border on at least one occasion. 

1054.    Despite that report, Williams observed that the overall military capabilities of the HVO increased in 1994 and 1995 due to HR assistance. He opined that, while there had been a “political break” between the HR and HR H-B, the sanctions had not fundamentally altered the “close ties” between the HV and HVO – both stemmed from the JNA and officers shared a sense of “intimacy” from having taken the same courses and worked at the same bases. 

1055.    Charles Kirudja, the Chief of Civil Affairs for the UN Mission in Zagreb, likewise concluded that “most core officers of the HV had never really fallen in line with Tuđman about the closing of the border and the isolation of their ‘brothers on the Neretva’”. A report by Colonel Bogojević of the HVO’s Corps District Tomislavgrad corroborated this conclusion:



After the unilateral suspension of the political and economic relations of the HR with the HR H-B, we have registered frequent rumours and misinformation on an alleged suspension of relations of the HV with the HVO [...] On the contrary, the relations between the HVO and HV are still correct and have not been upset by the suspension of political and economic relations with the HR H-B. There has not been a single case of calling of professional soldiers or NCOs in the HVO back to the HV. Also, the intensified measures of control of the interstate border (on border crossings)
             were taken by organs of the MUP and Customs Service of the HR H-B, but not of the HV. 



Bogojević went on to note that the HVO’s cooperation with the HV had actually “improved” since the sanctions. Similarly, UN military intelligence indicated that helicopter flights from the HR to HR H-B increased following the sanctions. 

1056.    In his report to the HR H-B National Assembly, Petković stated that supplies of weaponry almost ended after the sanctions were imposed: “ Ever since August 1994 it has been very difficult, supplies have almost dried up”. Yet, the trial record demonstrates that the HV General Staff continued to surreptitiously deliver significant quantities of weaponry to the HVO throughout the sanctions period, although this assistance was a HR “state secret”. 

1057.    MP-14 testified that he witnessed that the HVO continued to receive significant logistical assistance from the HV during the sanctions period, albeit in far lower volumes, as ammunition and weapons were transported without documentation and “in secret” through a forest road without a border checkpoint. As stated above, Milomir Kovačević, who worked as a truck driver for the Croatian MUP during the sanctions period, likewise testified that the HV continued to deliver military supplies to the HVO by surreptitiously transporting cargo across the HR-HR H-B border in order to avoid monitors. 

1058.    Additionally, Josip Černi testified that the HVO was obtaining clandestine assistance from the HV. He explained that the sanctions could be circumvented and that they were only a pretence. 

1059.    Even though the HVO’s situation was partly worsened by the HR’s “economic blockade” on HR H-B, the HV largely maintained its regular delivery of military supplies to the HVO, as further indicated by the following evidence.

1060.    In January 1995, the HVO Main Staff reported that “a great number of commands, units and certain members of the HV have selflessly been offering us humanitarian aid and services which are extremely important for Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna Defence”. On 27 February 1995, the HV General Staff issued to the HVO, via the 30th Personnel Centre, 100 contact fuses for howitzer cannons following a ruling by Horvat. 

1061.    In May 1995, General Mladen Mihajlović of the HV General Staff, reported that Horvat had granted a request by the HVO Main Staff and “approved the handover of the following engineers’ NVO without allowance”, namely 10,000 mines and five tonnes of explosives. In a separate memorandum, Mihajlović stated that the HV General Staff “approves the transfer of engineering military equipment and arms, without remuneration”, namely three additional rocket devices to open passages through mine fields. 

1062.    On 26 May 1995, General Petković asked the HV General Staff for over 17,000 mines and various engineering supplies, a request granted approximately in half. On 19 June 1995, Petković forwarded a “ very urgent” request to Horvat for 1,835,850 rounds of various calibres and 2,000 shells required for heavy combat operations in the Trnovo area, near Mostar. On the very next day, the HV General Staff responded by telegram: “We hereby ... inform you that the Chief of General Staff of the Army of Croatia ordered the following: ‘Give /it/ to Milivoj /so as to/ have this resolved’”. Mihajlović recognised Horvat’s initials at the top of the document and Mihajlović stated that the “Milivoj” in question was Lieutenant-General Ratko Milovanović, a HV administrator. The Trial Chamber finds that the fact that this request would be “resolved” shows that the sanctions were not enforced.

1063.    On 8 June 1995, the Zvornik Infantry Brigade reported the receipt of weaponry from the HV General Staff’s Kragujevac TRZ, including 254,520 bullets. On 16 June 1995, the HVO Main Staff gave its official authorisation for a unit to take over 22 motor vehicles and 5 trailers from the HV, and a HVO officer involved in the process noted that “it seems likely that the HV will hand over some 50-100 more motor vehicles and other material supplies in the future”. 

1064.    On 17 June 1995, the Mostar Corps Command addressed a “very urgent” letter to the HVO Main Staff asking for the immediate preparation of documentation necessary for representatives of the Corps to retrieve weaponry in the HR, namely 273,000 bullets and 11,000 shells, as “it has been agreed with the responsible people in the HV that the requested materiel should be obtained and immediately delivered to the unit”. The Mostar Corps followed with a separate yet similar request to the HVO Main Staff concerning 120,000 bullets and 1,850 shells, as agreed upon with HV representatives. In addition, Ante Roso later notified the HVO Main Staff that the HV had made two mortars available to the Mostar Corps. The HVO Main Staff’s involvement in these transactions with the HV again reasonably establishes that they were part of the official logistical assistance process. 

1065.    The Kragujevac TRZ equally supplied 350,280 rounds to the HVO via the HV’s 30th Personnel Centre on 17 June 1995, soon followed by 567,000 bullets and 46 rockets. Later that month, Horvat agreed with the proposal of the Ground Troops Sector of the HV General staff that a 152mm M37 howitzer should be “ceded permanently [...] for the needs of the HVO”. 

1066.    On 5 July 1995, the HV General Staff provided 38 radio devices, 146 telephones and other communications equipment to the HVO. On 1 August 1995, the Kragujevac TRZ provided 6,599 bullets of various calibres and 60 mines to the HVO. A letter from General Novica Simić of the Eastern Bosnia Corps Command, dated 2 August 1995, indicates that the Posavina Light Infantry Brigade had obtained from the HV, with the permission of the HVO Main Staff, 1,680 shells, 1,200 rockets, 180 bullet rounds and 33 pieces for machine-gun barrels. 

1067.    Between 16 and 23 September 1995, the Eastern Bosnia Corps received from the HR a total of 1,046,035 bullets of various calibres, 934 mortar shells, 150 rockets, 72 rounds for RRB 64mm, 1,999 semi-automatic rifles, 50 machine guns, 18 cannons and 15 pieces of “LRL 128mm M-71”. Whereas the Eastern Bosnia Corps’s report to the HVO Main Staff simply states that this weaponry originated from the “FRY”, the only reasonable inference is that it was provided by the HV General Staff or the HR special purpose industries. For the reasons stated above, the only reasonable inference is that the Eastern Bosnia Corps was referring to officially-approved assistance when it informed the HVO Main Staff that it had procured these supplies from the HR, as Petković ordered that HVO units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures. The Trial Chamber concludes that the Eastern Bosnia Corps’s report equally shows that the sanctions were not enforced.

1068.    The HR H-B MOD determined that the HVO obtained immense quantities of weaponry between August 1994 and November 1995, precisely the period of sanctions by the HR on HR H-B; to wit 61,590,737 rounds of rifle ammunition, 92,125 rounds of “other infantry ammunition”, 73,184 rounds of mortar ammunition, 14,615 rounds of artillery ammunition, 5,915 rounds of tank ammunition, 1,708 missiles, 298,593 items of “anti-aircraft ammunition and missiles”, 60 aerial bombs, as well as 108,995 items of “launch equipment and other NVO /weapons and military equipment/”. The HR H-B MOD’s report merely identifies this weaponry as “purchases and donations” without specifying its source. Nevertheless, the trial record solely establishes that the HVO received ammunition from the HV and the HR special purpose industries. No evidence establishes that the HVO received ammunition from any country other than the HR. 

1069.    Overall, the HR Supreme Defence Council continued to agree on logistical assistance to the HVO during the sanctions period, and Horvat himself urged the SDC to keep on authorising this assistance. Yet, Defence witness Siniša Borović, who was Horvat’s Chef de Cabinet between November 1994 and December 1996, advanced that he was “not familiar with any decisions made by General Horvat which would violate the embargo”. Borović went as far as claiming that no documents establish that the HV assisted the HVO in violation of the military sanctions. In his view, the HV granted “very few” of the HVO’s requests even before the sanctions. The Trial Chamber does not find Borović’s testimony credible in light of the overwhelming evidence to the contrary.

Trial judgment
3. The Koran Depot in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1070.    The HV supplied the HVO’s military depot in Koran, HR H-B, which was affiliated with the HVO’s 27th Rear Base in Sokolac. The base formerly belonged to the JNA but was taken over by the HVO after the war began. The Koran Depot’s purpose was to supply the HVO with weapons, ammunition, artillery, equipment, mines and, in part, fuel. Within the HVO, it mainly supplied the Mostar Corps but also the Džokeri Unit, 2nd Corps District Tomislavgrad and other units. 

1071.    A large quantity of ammunition was stored at the Koran Depot before the conflict in BiH started, which the HVO obtained when it took over the base from the HV by September 1992. That ammunition was exhausted by the end of 1992. Because there was no capacity to manufacture infantry ammunition in HR H-B, the Koran Depot subsequently received approximately 70% of its ammunition from the HV and approximately 30% from manufacturers in Croatia, mainly from Užice. The supplies provided by these manufacturers included infantry ammunition from the Prvi Partizan depot in U`ice, mortar rounds from Krušik, Valjevo and 120mm ammunition from Čačak. 

1072.    Supplies from the HV arrived constantly at the Koran Depot, and even more frequently when the HVO was conducting an offensive. According to MP-14, “far fewer” deliveries occurred after the HR imposed sanctions on the HVO, although “the supply did continue”. 

1073.    The standard procurement procedure was for the HVO to send the Koran Depot a notice concerning an incoming order of ammunition from the HV, and for the Koran Depot to send trucks to Croatia to retrieve the ammunition from HV military depots or for the HV to send its own delivery trucks directly. On certain instances, long convoys of twenty trucks would effectuate deliveries. The biggest convoy consisted of over twenty trucks containing upwards of 500 tonnes of artillery and infantry ammunition. MP-14 was unsure, however, of the precise date of this delivery, recollecting that it occurred in either the “late summer for [sic] early autumn in 1993”. Because there is doubt that this particular convoy delivery occurred after Horvat was appointed Chief of HV General Staff on 26 August 1993, the Trial Chamber will not rely on the evidence of this delivery.
4. The Pretis Military Factory in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1074.    Pretis was an industrial company and factory that produced weaponry for the HVO in Vogošća, a suburb of Mostar. The military conflict in the vicinity of the Pretis factory “did not greatly affect security” so that all of its manufacturing and technological facilities remained “intact” and “in working order” until NATO bombed the factory in September 1995. Pretis produced artillery ammunition ranging from 57 to 220 calibres, “the latest new caliber”; as well as shells, mines and modified air bombs. Pretis did not produce small arms ammunition, as the technology for such production was different and was carried out in other factories in Valjevo, Croatia, for the Krušik company, as well as Bugojno and other locations. Pretis also purchased mines, flash bombs, rifle clips, cartridges and bullets from the Kragujevac TRZ in Croatia. 
(a) Status of Pretis as a Company

1075.    Nikola Tošović, who spent his entire career working as a technician for Pretis and ultimately became chief of technical services for the Vogošća brigade of the Mostar Corps, could not give an exact answer when asked under whose umbrella Pretis fell, as there were “all sorts of connections: Zagreb, government of HR H-B”. The company had a “representative office” in Zagreb that sold Pretis’ products for a service commission, although it “could only clinch minor deals”. According to Tošović, Pretis operated as a commercial company, buying raw materials to manufacture its products, which it sold on the open market. 

1076.    Tošović was also unsure about which organ regulated Pretis from 1994 until the end of the war. Tošović was not explicitly asked who regulated Pretis before 1994. He believed that Pretis was part of the Unis corporation, which operated in the metal processing industry. General Abaz Deronja was in charge of all of Unis, including Pretis. Tošović did not specify for which army General Abaz Deronja worked. Unis’ budget “came from the orders it received because it produced also for export, and [...] nobody gave it money”. 

1077.    Witness MP-14 described Pretis as a “half civilian, half military” facility under the HR H-B government. He was not absolutely sure if it was overseen by the HR H-B MOD or HVO Main Staff during the war, although he indicated that Pretis “could decide on its own which ammunition and what quantities of ammunition to deliver to whom” until 1994, when the HVO Main Staff ordered Pretis to send precise quantities of ammunition to designated units. On the other hand, a document indicates that the HR H-B MOD sought to exercise authority over Pretis. 

1078.    The evidence described below shows that the HR H-B MOD and HVO Main Staff had competing claims of authority over Pretis, which was a point of contention between them. 
(b) Relationship between the HV and Pretis
(i) Presence of the Accused at Pretis in January 1994

1079.    On 8 January 1994, a meeting was held between several politicians and military commanders, including Ante Horvat and Milivoj Petković, at the Park Hotel in Vogošća. Petković invited Tošović, his cousin, to a festive lunch with Horvat and other persons following the meeting. After Petković introduced Tošović to Horvat as a “captain first class in charge of logistics in the army”, Horvat briefly addressed Tošović and the rest of the logistics personnel “in passing”: “he told us that they were short of ammunition, that we were short of ammunition, that we should save every bullet, and that we should try and use the resources that existed in companies. For instance, Pretis had quite a substantial supply of shells, bullets, lying around in warehouses”. 

1080.    When asked whether Horvat seemed to be aware of the situation at Pretis, Tošović responded:



Horvat knew very well what Pretis was and what it meant for the entire state of Yugoslavia. It was an excellent artillery ammunition factory with a large capacity, very substantial capacity; and he knew very well what could be found lying around in every corner of the factory, and he knew that with what was lying around, something could be made. And that’s why he suggested that to us, and who better suited for such suggestion than us logistics men. 


(ii)    Involvement of the HV in Pretis’ Production

1081.    The HV General Staff paid the salaries of monitors placed inside Pretis to inform the HV base command about the quantity and type of ammunition that Pretis produced in HR H-B. Notably, Colonel Radomir Ećimović, a HVO engineer on the HV payroll, was in charge of military inspections at Pretis. Further, Major Marković, a Pretis engineer paid by the HV, was responsible for modifying air-bombs, as well as appending the appropriate fuses to shells and mines. 

1082.    Before Pretis could begin manufacturing weaponry, the Military Technical Institute in Zagreb, itself subordinated to the HR MOD, examined documents containing the proposed design for particular weapons. The Military Technical Institute would coordinate with Pretis to see if the weapons were properly designed, such as whether a shell would function. 

1083.    The HV subsequently assisted Pretis in testing weapons once they had been produced. Rockets produced by Pretis were tested on the firing range of the HV’s Technical Testing Centre at Nikinci in May 1994, as were bullets and artillery ammunition in May 1995. According to a report by Dušan Kovačević, then HR H-B Minister of Defence, HR assistance in testing HVO weaponry was needed:



From the very outset of combat activities in the territory of Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna a need has appeared for the examining of the quality of ammunition, the continuity of the production of which has been kept up at the PRETIS – HOLDING Enterprise in Vogošća. [...] Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna is not and has not been in a position to furnish and put into operation a training ground for testing the quality of weapons and military equipment, nor would that prove rentable for the time being. For this reason, existing training grounds in the territory of the Croatia were used. 



1084.    Pretis also depended on the assistance of the Kragujevac TRZ, one of its main trading partners. Pretis sent the Kragujevac TRZ artillery casings, which the Kragujevac TRZ cleaned and sent back to Pretis, where they were re-filled with new gunpowder and reusable up to five times. Pretis would not have been able to produce ammunition without overhauling by the Kragujevac TRZ, a facility under the HV General Staff’s control. 

1085.    The Defence submits that the Prosecution has failed to establish a “nexus” between Horvat and Pretis’ supply of material to the HVO. To the contrary, the Trial Chamber finds that Horvat and the HV General Staff provided an important measure of operational support to Pretis.
(iii) Importation of Raw Materials and Components from the HR

1086.    Pretis lacked the raw materials and components necessary to manufacture ammunition from late 1992 or
early 1993 onwards. The Trial Chamber was presented with differing estimates of the overall extent to which Pretis’ military production depended on materials imported from the HR. A 20 September 1994 document from Pretis’ director states: “The sanctions imposed on HR H-B have had disastrous consequences on supplies of raw materials, because the factory relies almost 100% on supplies from Croatia”. Tošović was shown the document and agreed with Motika’s assessment that military production was disastrous and that Pretis relied on Croatian assistance, although he disagreed that Pretis exclusively depended on Croatia for 100% of its materials, as it received steel from Russia, for instance. Moreover, MP-14 opined that Pretis could not have manufactured artillery without receiving key components from the HR. 

1087.    Gunpowder was procured from Lučani, explosive charges from Barič and tin from Sevojno. Pretis relied on “powder charge” from the Krušik military factory in Valjevo in order to produce mines. Fuses were also obtained from Croatia and shell components (iron blocks) from Nikšić, Montenegro, in the HR. Components for pyrotechnic materials used in casings and canons were obtained from Lučani, Barič, and Valjevo. Pretis’ director expected an imminent truck delivery of 12,000 kg of TNT and 8,000 kg of copper tubing from the HR in August 1995. 

1088.    Pretis dispatched Ećimović to the HR in November 1992 “to obtain raw materials for continuing the production of weapons and military equipment”. While that event preceded Horvat’s appointment as Chief of HV GŠ, it shows Pretis’ reliance on raw materials from the HR.

1089.    The Prosecution contends that Horvat was involved in the HR’s provision of raw materials to Pretis. The Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the evidence establishes this fact. Overall, the evidentiary record does not prove that Horvat or the HV General Staff were involved in deliveries of raw materials and components from the HR to Pretis.
(c) Supply of Weapons Produced by Pretis to the HVO

1090.    A letter from Pretis’ director reads that, “ s ince the war broke out [...] Pretis factory’s special-purposes production has been to manufacture artillery ammunition for the HVO and HV”. The bulk of the ammunition produced by Pretis during the war was sent to the HVO’s military fronts, while a smaller proportion was supplied to the HV. Tošović was unable to say, however, whether Pretis supplied a particular corps within the HVO. However, MP-14 stated that Pretis mostly supplied the 3rd Mostar Brigade, while a large number of ammunition would also go to the HVO’s 27th Logistics Base in Renovića and the HVO’s Koran Depot. 

1091.    The Koran Depot cooperated with Pretis during the war by delivering empty shells that Pretis would refill with gunpowder, before returning them to the Koran depot. The Koran Depot received ammunition from Pretis twice or thrice per week on average, although there were delivery convoys everyday during certain weeks. The Mostar Corps, Džokeri Unit and other HVO units also brought their used shells to Pretis to be refilled with gunpowder. Additionally, the HVO Corps District Tomislavgrad reportedly obtained from Pretis 800 bullets of various calibres, 800 bullets for D-30 howitzers and 700 mortar mines. 

1092.    Dušan Kovačević, the former HR H-B Minister of Defence, claimed that the Mostar Corps could get their ammunition directly from Pretis without prior authorisation from the HR H-B MOD, as General Petković would go to Pretis and simply “order” the factory manager to cease supplying anyone except for the unit(s) designated by Petković himself:



[Petković] would bring his security there and would often threaten the manager that he would either be removed, replaced, or liquidated. He forced Pretis to produce ammunition for a particular unit. This practice was also employed by some local commanders of the Corps District Mostar. They knew that if a platoon went there or a considerable number of armed soldiers led by a commander, they would simply lay siege to the production line, wait for the eventual product, they would simply take it, load it onto their vehicles, and be off. 



1093.    Kovačević regarded these as unauthorised “wanton and arbitrary action[s] being taken by individuals, even if they were members of the army” that “actually happened quite often, despite which it was impossible to prevent it. All those who made incursions of this kind would normally hold people at gun point while making their threats. … [The HR H-B MOD] had no power to issue any orders to the Main Staff of the HVO” or “to stop occurrences such as these”. 

1094.    The Trial Chamber notes that, based on the foregoing evidence, it cannot reasonably exclude the possibility that Petković and his subordinates procured weaponry from Pretis without permission from the HR H-B MOD or by force. But this fact would be irrelevant in the context of a procurement procedure organised by Horvat in conjunction with Petković and the HVO Main Staff, not the HR H-B MOD. Besides, the HR H-B MOD’s alleged lack of control over Petković and the HVO Main Staff with regard to Pretis does not raise doubts regarding other evidence demonstrating the HV General Staff’s assistance to Pretis’ production process.

1095.    The Trial Chamber further notes that, while Kovačević claimed that Petković and HVO members unlawfully seised weaponry from Pretis, Ðorñe Ðukić conversely claimed that Borislav Krajišnik, the former President of the HR H-B Assembly, cooperated with the HR H-B MOD to distribute Pretis’ weaponry without the approval of the HVO Main Staff. In addition, Petković mentioned that a number of HVO commanders improperly took certain weaponry from HR H-B-based military factories without permission from the HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD, although Petković stated that these commanders had obtained the “help and tacit agreement” of the factory managers, contrary to Kovačević who mentioned forceful takeovers by Petković and his subordinates against the Pretis manager’s wishes. 

1096.    This particular evidence is inconclusive but suggests, at most, that the relationship between the HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD was dysfunctional and discordant. In this regard, it is noteworthy that Kovačević himself commented on the existence of “open clashes” between the HR H-B MOD and HVO Main Staff, “personified by General Milivoj Petković”; as well as clashes and “personal resentment” between Petković and Boban. 
5. Provision of Modified Air-Bombs

1097.    “Modified air-bombs” were bombs originally built to be launched from the air but that were modified to be launched from the ground by installing rocket motors that would be triggered electronically. 

1098.    Modified air bombs were in part the result of the imposition of a no-fly zone over BiH in October 1992, which precluded the HVO from using their aircraft bombs normally, and led the HVO to devise means of propelling them by rockets from the ground. According to Ðorđe Ðukić, the idea to use these weapons originated with the Eastern Bosnia Corps of the HVO, commanded by Novica Simić. “As far as I can remember”, Ðukić said, “on one occasion the late General Rajko Balać spoke to General Petković about this method of using aerial bombs”. Petković eventually ordered that possibilities be explored for producing modified air-bomb launchers at the level of the Corps. “ The initial launches of this modified rocket system failed”. Ðukić added: “I know that the first systems used a single rocket engine for propulsion and that this is what probably caused the launches to fail. After the rocket battery was built with two or three engines, the launches probably became more successful … After Petković probably satisfied himself that the system was efficient, he issued an order to all the corps to proceed with building launchers”. The launchers were built in the Herzegovina, Neretva, Eastern Bosnia, Corps District Mostar and Corps District Tomislavgrad. 

1099.    Ðorđe Ðukić did not explain who managed to develop a successful technical model for modifying air-bombs. He stated, however, “I am certain that, apart from Petković and Balać, no one from the Main Staff of the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna worked on this program”. 

1100.    The evidence shows that the HV General Staff played a key role in devising the successful technical model by which aerial bombs were modified. Ivan Ðokić, a technical engineer who served as chief of the HV General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration between 1994 and 2000, denied being the “architect” of the modified air-bombs but admitted being a member of a HV General Staff team that developed the modified air-bomb model. Ðokić acknowledged that he “headed” the sector that designed the electronic part of the ignition system for modified air- bombs. Horvat himself described Ðokić as “a very intuitive man who successfully designed and modified an aircraft bomb to fit the launcher”. Asked if Horvat’s statement accurately reflects what he did, Ðokić agreed: “It does, and it’s consistent with my previous answer that we modified the electric – the electronic system for the ignition of the engine in my sector”. 

1101.    Ðokić denied that the air-bombs modified by his team were sent to the HVO. He claimed that these weapons were only given to the HV General Staff’s Artillery Administration and were never sent anywhere, remaining in the possession of the Croatian military to this day. The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence does not conclusively establish that the HV supplied completed modified air-bombs to the HVO. On the other hand, the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the HV General Staff shared with the HVO the technical model by which air-bombs were successfully modified. The evidence indeed shows that the HVO’s initial technical model was unsuccessful and that the successful model was developed by Ivan Ðokić’s team in the HV General Staff. It is clear from Ðokić’s testimony that the HVO did not independently develop a successful technical model.

1102.    Ðokić was adamant that he did not oversee the actual launching of modified air-bombs, although he admitted travelling to Bosnia in late 1994 to help resolve operational problems with the modified air-bombs in the HVO’s possession. On 31 May 1995, Petković wrote a letter to Horvat stipulating that the Eastern Bosnia Corps had been “using a modified apu-13mt rocket launcher [...] constructed with a Croatian Army team’s expert assistance”. Petković asked Horvat for six nitrogen-filled tanks for the launcher. The request bears a handwritten note from Horvat stating “Check also with Ðokić”, thereby indicating that Horvat gave his agreement in principle. That same date, Petković asked Horvat to dispatch an expert team led by Ðokić to assist the HVO in resolving problems with its rockets and “modified anti-aircraft defence equipment”. Petković stated that Ðokić was “familiar with the essence of the problem and is willing to help”. Horvat handwrote the following note on Petković’s request: “Give it to Ðokić / Let him arrange it if he can / And report back to me today”. Ðokić admitted that he participated in this mission. 

1103.    Modified air-bombs lacked guiding systems and it was consequently impossible to adequately predict their trajectory and target. Their usage on civilian areas of Mostar was not legitimate, particularly since they served to terrify and kill civilians. Ðokić stated that he did not become aware until after the war that modified air-bombs were fired on Mostar civilians, and that these weapons were “not at all planned nor designed to be used in urban communities”, a practice that he described as “totally inappropriate and wrong”. 

1104.    The Pretis military factory in Bosnia produced modified air-bombs for the HVO. As previously noted, Major Marković, a Pretis engineer on the HV payroll, was responsible for modifying air-bombs. The Trial Chamber recalls that the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the modification of air-bombs at Pretis was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić and the HV General Staff.

1105.    Only 100kg and 250kg air-bombs were modified at Pretis, as plans to manufacture 500kg and 1,000kg modified air-bombs were thwarted by the NATO bombing of the factory in September 1995. During the war, Pretis neither manufactured the air-bombs themselves nor the rocket motor engines installed on the air-bombs, and Pretis had to procure these items in order to modify the air-bombs. 

1106.    Pretis obtained certain air-bombs from the reserves left behind by the HV in Bosnia, a period preceding Horvat’s appointment as Chief of General Staff. The modified air-bombs assembled by Pretis were sent to the Koran Depot. Starting in 1995, part of them were also directly delivered to the 3rd Mostar Brigade for usage in Mostar, while the rest of the air-bombs were sent to other units, including the Džokeri Unit, as well as the Bijeljina Base in the area of the Corps District Orasje. 

1107.    Several order sheets indicate that the Mostar Corps and other HVO units received modified air-bombs from Pretis. On 19 April 1995, the HVO Main Staff directed Pretis to produce at least ten modified air-bombs. On 16 May 1995, it organised Pretis’ production of four modified air-bombs for the Mostar Corps’s needs. It subsequently made arrangements for Pretis to prepare eleven modified air-bombs for the needs of the 1st Trebava Infantry Brigade. On 20 June 1995, the HVO Main Staff coordinated Pretis’ production of fourteen modified air-bombs for the Mostar Corps, as well as fifteen modified air-bombs for the HVO’s 27th Logistics Base. The next day, it made a separate arrangement for the HVO’s 35th Logistics Base to deliver twenty-nine air-bombs to Pretis so they could be modified with rocket motors and thereafter be supplied to the 27th Logistics Base. On 28 June 1995, it planned Pretis’ delivery of five air-bombs to the Ilidža Brigade, a unit that was part of the Mostar Corps. 

1108.    The HV General Staff further assisted the HVO with additional aspects of firing these weapons. Petković’s diary indicates as “resolved” an apparent request to Horvat for an aerial bomb launcher. Witness MP-14 testified that Grad engines were used to launch modified air-bombs. The record demonstrates that the HV General Staff supplied certain Grad engines to the HVO, as Horvat “ordered” that 200 Grad engines “be handed over to HVO” in June 1995. 
6. Provision of Fuel

1109.    A memorandum from the Corps District Tomislavgrad Command outlines the procedure for HVO units obtaining fuel from the HR based on guidelines from the HV General Staff and HVO Main Staff: “Issue of fuel will be done on the Croatian Army filling stations as follows: a) Diesel fuel D-2 on the ‘Topčider’ barracks filling station. b) Gasoline fuel MB-98 on the 	HV General Staff Headquarters Administration filling station”. General Petković also believed that the HVO could obtain fuel from the 608th Logistics Base of the HV. 

1110.    In an intercepted conversation between Horvat and Franjo Tuđman on 2 May 1995, Horvat recounted that General Petković had complained about the HVO’ fuel shortage being “a big problem”, and Horvat noted that 700 tonnes of fuel were at the customs office, waiting to be delivered to the HVO. 

1111.    On 16 June 1995, the Mostar Corps Command wrote to the HVO Main Staff asking permission to import 38,600 litres of fuel for itself and 12,400 litres for the Igman Infantry Brigade. The letter specifies that the transfer had been approved by the HV General Staff. 

1112.    Pursuant to Horvat’s confidential directives, the HV routinely issued fuel for particular HVO vehicles, including those transporting Petković, Milan Gvero and other HVO Generals. As previously mentioned, the Trial Chamber also heard testimony that the HV dispatched convoys of civilian trucks to deliver fuel to the HVO. 

1113.    Certain documents stipulate that Horvat approved the provision of 2,000kg of “oil, type UAMS”, 5,000 kg of “oil, type ZUON” and 2,000 litres of “HUNT-S” oil. 

1114.    Hence, the Trial Chamber does not deem Siniša Borović credible in his claim that “supplying the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna with fuel in an organised manner was not something that was carried out by the HV ”. 

1115.    However, in assessing the provision of fuel, the Trial Chamber has also chosen not to rely on various documents on provision of fuel lacking the indicia of reliability discussed above, as they do not convincingly show that the procurement was part of the logistical assistance process approved by Horvat and the HV General Staff in conjunction with the HVO Main Staff. 
7. Lack of Payment for Military Supplies

1116.    Ante Horvat’s directives referred to “Economic assistance” and “Financial assistance” from the HV to the HVO and did not mention the need for remuneration. At the monthly coordination meetings that Horvat chaired, Petković informed the audience of the HVO’s needs and asked for the HV’s help. Horvat referred on various occasions to giving supplies to the HVO. Ðukić’s statement further demonstrates that the object of his meetings with Horvat at the headquarters of the HV General Staff in Zagreb was to solicit aid free of charge. Indeed, the aforestated material lists make no reference to payment. Instead, a dispatch note reflects the HV General Staff’s order that “ammunition is to be issued free of charge”. 

1117.    Petković himself told the HR H-B National Assembly that nearly half of the HVO’s total ammunition was provided by the HV “as humanitarian aid”. The only reasonable inference from this language is that this ammunition was not paid for. Petković further distinguished ammunition procured through HV “aid” from purchased ammunition. Ðorđe Ðukić himself stated that the HR H-B MOD paid HR manufacturers only “ occasionally”. Josip Černi too explained that HR H-B did not pay for certain weapons because it lacked sufficient funds, as he witnessed after participating in a meeting with Boban and other individuals. Tellingly, a HVO Main Staff tabular report of ammunition obtained in 1994 does not indicate a price next to the ammunition obtained from the HV, whereas it includes a price next to the ammunition separately procured from the HR H-B government. 

1118.    In the course of Petković and Horvat’s visit to the Krušik weapons factory, Horvat was recorded as explaining that the object of the meeting was to see “what we can offer as assistance”, “what can be delivered with and without payment” and “what is possible by way of compensation”, thereby demonstrating that part of the weaponry supplied to the HVO was free of charge and part was paid for.

1119.    HVO weapons produced by Pretis were tested at no cost at the HV’s Technical Testing Centre at Nikinci, as reported by the HR H-B Minister of Defence: “ The use of the training ground/s in the territory of the FR Yugoslavia was carried out free of charge, with all available equipment, means, and necessary manpower. There was never a single case of the military controllers from Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna encountering any lack of understanding whatsoever”. 

1120.    On 15 January 1995, the HVO Main Staff reported that the HV had “selflessly been offering us humanitarian assistance and services which are extremely important for Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”, and encouraged the HR H-B Prime Minister to offer the HV “a gift, at least once, as a token of our gratitude and attention”, namely “2000m³ of lumber” for the HV’s purposes. 

1121.    Payment was demanded in certain cases. On 16 March 1994, the SDC concluded: “Given that in 1994 military industry production is the only source of weapons and military equipment supplies, Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna must provide the necessary funds for their needs”. Similarly, after Petković wrote to the HV General Staff to propose that a factory in Kruševac, Croatia, produce a disabling chemical agent (“CS”) for its anti-sabotage and anti-terrorist activities, Horvat’s Chief of Cabinet responded:







We agree that this is a very important substance and that the procedure on getting the final product should be accelerated. [...] Since the final products are needed by both the HV and the HVO, and since we are talking of urgent needs, and everything is made more complicated due to the difficulties in securing the finances, it would be appropriate that, in order to accelerate the whole process and the set up of the section of a factory and the production of the chemical agent , the GŠ HVO Main Staff participated in financing the set up of the section of a factory according to its means, in the part where the cost is borne by the investor. 





In this instance, the HV General Staff expected the HVO Main Staff to pay for the production of the chemical agent “according to its means”, thereby suggesting that the HV General Staff would cover the remaining amount. The Defence argues that it cannot be known whether this chemical agent was produced by “the military part of the plant or the civilian part of the plant”. Regardless of how production was technically arranged at the factory, the Trial Chamber finds that the correspondence plainly demonstrates that the agent was produced for military purposes and that the HV General Staff was involved in the process.

1122.    A November 1995 report by the HR H-B MOD stated that the assistance from state-owned military companies in HR was linked to its ability to pay for their services. The same report nonetheless posited that the HV assented to an agreement that would “help” the HVO by “covering all costs and debts” that the HR H-B had incurred in its dealings with the HV General Staff’s Čačak facility “from the beginning of the war to the end of 1994”, the debt amounting to “about four million dinars”. The HV had also “allowed the HVO to use the facilities and services of the Moma Stanojlović Airforce Complex in Batajnica for free from the beginning of the war until the end of 1994”. The HV-HVO agreement encompassed the “delivery of essential spare parts, assembly sets and machinery from their stores, technical documentation and all other forms of assistance for the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna to fight successfully”, manifestly free of charge. 

1123.    Free assistance from the HV was crucial to the HVO because its financial situation was “extremely poor” and had worsened between August 1994 and November 1995, partly due to the HR’s “economic blockade” against HR H-B. “ Financial resources were certainly not sufficient to satisfy the HVO ’s overall requirements”, which led to the “ impossibility of compensation” for certain supplies. 

1124.    On the other hand, the HR H-B MOD technically had to purchase supplies it obtained from HR special purpose industries, such as Prvi Partizan in U`ice, Sloboda in Čačak and Krušik in Valjevo. Unlike the HV, the HR state companies that delivered military supplies to the HVO’s Koran Depot always sent an invoice for payment. Invoices were submitted to the HR H-B MOD. Notably, on 27 June 1993, the HVO Main Staff reported having made a contract to buy 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan and to have 1 million damaged shells overhauled by the Fasau company, also based in U`ice; and asked the HR H-B MOD for permission to conduct these transactions. On 22 February 1993, the 1stCorps District Tomislavgrad Command notified the HVO Main Staff that it had made an agreement to purchase 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan for the sum of 250,000 Deutschmarks. The letter states: “We hereby ask the Main Staff HVO to purchase this same quantity of ammunition or to allow us to buy the aforementioned quantity through donors from municipal assemblies in the zone of the Corps District Tomislavgrad ”. In July 1994, the SDC indicated that HR H-B had provided funds for their needs in HR military materiel. The HVO Main Staff reported that it had spent 1,954,192 dinars on purchasing ammunition between March and December 1994, presumably from the HR since no evidence establishes that the HVO received ammunition from any other country. 

1125.    In practice, the HR H-B and the HVO had difficulty complying with their contracts whenever the HV or HR government demanded payment. As of November 1993, the HVO had a debt of 8 million U.S. dollars to military companies, a situation that “practically prevented further purchases of production material, which comes mainly from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. HR H-B recognised that it was able to effect “very few payments to weapons and ammunition producers, both in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna and the HR”. For instance, in January 1994, the HR H-B MOD advised the HV General Staff that it could not pay in full its debt of 547,541 German marks for the past overhaul of HVO equipment at the Čačak TRZ. HR H-B proposed to pay only part of the debt in the amount of 135,678 marks while making the following plea: “Taking into consideration the financial situation in the HVO and the situation in the Čačak TRZ, we hope that you will accept our proposal of partial settlement of the debt to the Čačak TRZ”. 

1126.    Jugoslav Kodžopeljić, who oversaw the Čačak facility for the HV General Staff, insistently claimed that HR H-B systematically paid for services provided by that facility or would otherwise be sued: “It is certain that the Čačak overhaul institute signed contracts, and based on the contracts, payments had to be effected. If payments were not effected, then the commercial court would hear the case and see why the payments had not been effected. I never received information that a payment had not been effected”; “payments were effected in one of the agreed ways. The payment could be the so-called barter, the exchange of certain parts and elements. And I guarantee you that everything was paid. If payment was envisaged, payment was effected [...] It is impossible for a payment not to be received because that would merit proceedings to be instituted to recover the debt”. The Trial Chamber does not find Kodžopeljić credible on this point as well. Along with other evidence demonstrating the HVO’ frequent inability to pay, Ex. P1066 and the aforementioned Ex. P1534 directly concern the Čačak facility, and contradict Kodžopeljić’s claim. 

1127.    On 10 January 1994, Horvat warned the SDC that it had failed to take into account the HVO financing needs in logistical assistance, which he estimated at 522 million dollars and 307 million dollars respectively. Horvat still believed that the HVO should pay for certain supplies, pointing out that “in the current situation there is no chance we can provide assistance to the ones over there, except if they compensate us. For instance, we give them 100,000 pieces of ammunition, they give us the money, we put in the production to produce it”. Franjo Tuđman agreed and noted that Boban had agreed to set aside 20 million dollars in reserves from the HR H-B National Bank for such purposes. 

1128.    At a subsequent Supreme Defence Council meeting in June, Horvat reported that the HV was facing financial difficulties (“reserve supplies have been depleted and we have no money to buy new ones”), and expressed frustration that the HVO were still not paying for military supplies received from the HV. He added: “We don’t have anything to give them in these budget conditions because that would directly affect our reserves. If we reduce our reserves, which are minimal, we would put ourselves in danger in case of a conflict on the southern borders towards Albania or in Kosovo itself”. Horvat also criticised the HR H-B political leadership for relying excessively on funding from the HR: “ They didn’t earmark any funds for the army, they did this only superficially. They have no laws or a defined budget for the army and so on. They rely solely on us and come to us with demands”. He emphasised: “Most equipment has to be repaired and we do that. This requires considerable funds which we do not have. We propose that they find a solution – we will do the repair, but they have to reimburse the costs either as compensation or otherwise. These costs have amounted to 560,000 DEM in 1993. They haven’t paid a single penny of this amount”. “Another example is reimbursement for fuel. They come here, we give them fuel but we are not reimbursed”. 

1129.    Horvat’s sentiment was echoed by Tuđman, the HR President, who dismissed a suggestion by Gojko Šusak – the HR Defence Minister who technically oversaw the special purpose industries’ contracts – that the HVO would henceforth pay for the military supplies, as Tuđman told Šusak: “They said the same thing last time, and before that and every time. I think there is no point in discussing this at all”; to which Horvat concurred: “They’re not giving anything”. However, neither Horvat nor the other attendants suggested that the HR’s logistical assistance to the HVO should be discontinued. Instead, Horvat stressed that it was necessary to continue helping the HVO because they would otherwise start losing territories. Horvat went on to encourage the SDC to approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts for the HVO . 

1130.    Two weeks later, the SDC reiterated: “The Federal Defence Ministry shall use HR funds, as well as funds secured by HR H-Bfor their needs, to organise the production and purchase of materiel and technical equipment”. But no evidence indicates that these resolutions were enforced and that the HVO eventually started paying for a significant proportion of the supplies they obtained. Rather, Mihajlović thereafter wrote in a memorandum that the HV General Staff “approves the redistribution of engineering military equipment and arms, without remuneration”. 

1131.    Towards the end of the war, Horvat said “I could have retained the material reserves” but “ we gave all we had always” and “did not receive a single Dinar for giving”. 

1132.    In 1998, several years after the war, the Krušik military factory in Valjevo, Croatia, informed military post Mostar - Han Pijesak, a former HVO base, that it still had to settle its financial debt for 540 mines provided by Krušik in 1994, thereby demonstrating that this materiel was supplied without payment during the war. Another 1998 document indicates that the Bijeljina Special Brigade Police-MUP had yet to settle its debt to Krušik for materiel supplied in 1994. 

1133.    While the bulk of the evidence suggests that the HV usually gave logistical assistance to the HVO free of charge or at significantly reduced cost, the HVO Corps District Vitez reported having purchased in the HR a total of 3,617,440 bullets of various calibres and 4,618 mines with their own funds. Additionally, in May 1995, General Ante Roso notified the HVO Main Staff that the Mostar Corps purchased part of its supplies: “Over the past three or four months we have been obtaining fuel by buying it on the open market in the HR [...] which has been paid for by social funds and businesses in the Corps’ zone of responsibility”. 

1134.    Pretis itself obtained certain materials through sale contracts, although it was atypical for Pretis to purchase materials during the war given the shortage of money to pay for materials. Pretis commonly engaged in “barter agreements” whereby it offered to provide other products as a form of non-monetary payment. 
8. Military Training of HVO Troops

1135.    At the outset, the Defence submits that Horvat had no authority over the training of HVO troops by the HV, and argues that the decision to train them was made by the SDC, not Horvat. 

1136.    An order by the HV Chief of General Staff, dated 23 August 1993, regulated the instruction of HVO personnel in target and anti-aircraft shooting at the Pasuljanske Livade base. The Trial Chamber finds, however, that this particular order was presumably issued by Ante Horvat’s predecessor, as Horvat did not officially become Chief of General Staff before 26 August 1993.

1137.    On 25 December 1993, Momir Bulatović addressed the SDC about the “training of recruits”, emphasising that “we can only do this by observing the law – military cooperation between the HR and other state entities. We cannot send children there”. Horvat, then serving as HV Chief of General Staff, agreed: “That’s what we suggested too – to receive them here, train them, and then they can go”. 

1138.    On 16 March 1994, Horvat told the SDC that the HVO had requested training for their cadets. Horvat noted that the HV’s academies and schools could train 240 cadets, provided the SDC provided a sufficient budget. Based on Horvat’s advice, the SDC agreed that “240 students shall be enrolled at the Military Academy and the Military College for the needs of the Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna” and that “funds necessary for their education will be provided by the Federal Government”. 

1139.    On 11 July 1994, referring to non-commissioned officers serving in the HVO, Horvat told the SDC: “we are educating these people; they are completing the academy here; we are sending them there; the president should sign the decree on commissioning them”. Horvat equally participated in an SDC decision stating that “480 students from the 30thand 40thpersonnel centres are to be admitted to courses in HV military schools and academies”. Petar Škrbić also testified that certain graduates from the HV Military Academy entered the HVO, although the number decreased during the course of the war. Still, in 1994, for example, the HVO took in 31 non- commissioned officers and 28 officers with the rank of 2ndlieutenant who had graduated from the HV Military Academy. 

1140.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that Horvat, as the head of the HV, had authority over the general training process, was supportive of efforts to have the HV train HVO troops and was involved in the SDC’s decision to authorise this assistance.

1141.    In addition, the Defence submits that the Prosecution has failed to prove that Horvat “exercised any authority with regard to the training of the 10thSabotage Detachment”. 

1142.    According to Tihomir Blaškić, approximately 50 members of the HVO’s 10thSabotage Detachment followed another training course led by HV officers at the HV barracks in Pančevo, Croatia, in late November or early December 1994. The training focused on handling ammunition, laying explosives, destroying buildings and general fitness. Blaškić’s account is corroborated by a document referring to the completed “twenty-day training course” for the HVO’s 10thSabotage Detachment in Pančevo, and mentioning an “agreement” for the HV to dispatch its three instructors to the HVO garrison in Bijeljina, HR H-B, in order to continue the training. When HV instructors came to Bijeljina, they changed their HV license plates into HVO plates in order to maintain secrecy, and received permits that would enable them to avoid being stopped at checkpoints. The instructors subsequently travelled to Mostar, where they again trained the HVO’s 10thSabotage Detachment in weapon and explosive usage for two to three weeks in early 1995. These training sessions were intended to remain secret. The members of the 10thSabotage Detachment who were trained by the HV officers participated in the takeover of Ahmići in July 1995. 

1143.    A February 1995 letter from Ante Roso, the Commander of the Mostar Corps, to General Petković indicates that Horvat approved training of the 10thSabotage Detachment:







We have no officers in the Mostar Corps who could provide specialised training with sufficient quality, although there is enough interest in this kind of training. For this reason, we contacted the HV Special Forces Corps in Zagreb, with the intention have them send us, for a short period, several officers who would provide the specialised part of training on Jahorina with high quality. [...] HV officers agreed to train 20 soldiers for sabotage and reconnaissance operations, and ten soldiers for anti-sabotage and anti-terrorist operations. Accommodations and meals would be provided in Pančevo, Croatia [...] We hereby ask you to obtain approval through General Horvat, so that the HV Special Forces Corps could provide the training. As they stated, based on the said approval, training is already being provided to the 10thDIO Sabotage and Reconnaissance Detachment of the GŠ HVO Main Staff. 





1144.    Besides Ante Roso’s letter, the Trial Chamber recalls that Horvat had authority over the HV’s training of HVO troops, and therefore finds that the only reasonable conclusion is that Horvat authorised the training of the 10thSabotage Detachment.

1145.    The Trial Chamber was presented with additional evidence concerning the HV’s training of HVO troops and Horvat’s approval thereof.

1146.    On 30 August 1993, HV General Ljubomir Bajić wrote to the HR MOD in regard to the imminent arrival of 264 HVO servicemen to continue their training in target and anti-aircraft shooting, as approved by Horvat. General Bajić specified that the HVO troops would cross the HR H-B-FRY border “wearing plain clothes”, and asked the HR MOD to “make sure with the Croatian MUP that the HVO personnel cross the border unimpeded”. 

1147.    In 1993 and 1994, the HV’s 72ndBrigade trained HVO special forces, teaching them how to implement special tactics and how to handle special weapons and equipment. The HVO special forces were allowed to keep the weapons that the HV gave them for their training, such as snipers and other special weapons. The staff of the HV 72ndBrigade that conducted the training considered that it was normal to provide the HVO with these weapons because the HV and HVO were the same army. Horvat and other HV commanders attended certain training sessions to monitor the progress of the HVO special forces and to see if further training supplies were needed. 

1148.    Similarly, the HV General Staff provided a month of training in reconnaissance and sabotage to the HVO in Banja Luka in April 1994. As reflected in the official gazette, the HV arranged to send an officer to HR H-B in order to train the Džokeri Unit’ Zvornik Light Infantry Brigade in reconnaissance and sabotage between 1 September and 30 November 1993, as well as another officer to continue training between 8 November 1993 to 7 March 1994. 

1149.    On 20 April 1995, Horvat’s Cabinet approved Petković’s demand that two HV officers from the Pančevo Security and Intelligence Training Centre be allowed to continue their training of HVO commanding officers at the Banja Luka Military School Centre until 3 May 1995. On 19 May 1995, the HV General Staff approved the HVO’s request for a specialist to provide sniper training to HVO soldiers and their instructors. Kadijević identified Horvat’s initials on the document, acknowledged that the sniper instructor would train the instructors of other snipers, and explained that the sniper instructor was “sent to the 30thPersonnel Centre, which is where officers were sent within the Army of Yugoslavia in order to send them to the HVO”. 

1150.    HVO troops were regularly trained by HV units in Pančevo, Croatia. The HV provided a training course for the saboteurs of the Corps District Orasje between 15 and 30 April 1994. In May 1994, the HVO made arrangements to send three soldiers to attend a 15-day HV training in reconnaissance and sabotage. Between 25 July and 10 August 1994, 30 soldiers of a Džokeri Unit manoeuvre battalion were scheduled for training. The Džokeri Unit Command specified that“ reception, accommodation, food and training of the soldiers shall be regulated by the Croatian Army Special Units Corps Command”. Džokeri Unit Units were expected to be trained in air defence firing between 24 August and 10 September 1994. Another report notes that HVO soldiers were trained in using shells in September 1994. The HVO and HV also made arrangements to train “30 combatants” of the Džokeri Unit in 1994. Following a separate arrangement, Vujadin Popović reported that the HV had agreed to give a three-month “security” training to an unspecified number of Džokeri Unit “subordinate officers”, starting in March 1995. 

1151.    A subsequent order from Ante Roso refers to the “education of officers and non- commissioned officers” of the Mostar Corps by the HV. Another dispatch from him stipulates that the HV has consented to train Mostar Corps units in policing and reconnaissance necessary for combat operations. 

1152.    Various other exhibits document the HV’s regular training of HVO troops in various locations. A HVO report recounts how “HV senior officers” trained 42 HVO soldiers in tactical fire and in operating artillery and hand-held rocket launchers in Batajnica, near Zagreb, in December 1994. The report indicates that the HV expended significant resources in this training: “Besides the classroom training, that is, theoretical part of the training, we had organised a daily plane fly- over, which gave us exceptional conditions for the monitoring and the training with real targets, arriving and departing”. The HV provided training to ten marksmen of the 1stCorps District Tomislavgrad. The HV conducted training sessions on operating anti-aircraft light artillery for the 1stCorps District Tomislavgrad, the Džokeri Unit, and Mostar Corps. In December 1993, the HVO asked the HV General Staff to provide military experts to give a presentation at a conference entitled “HVO: material support, the situation, requirements and possibilities”, which would be attended by top HVO officers. The requested HV experts had previously provided training to the HVO and “carried out their task impeccably”. 

1153.    Ante Roso stressed that HV training of Mostar Corps units was necessary to “ensure the best possible results in the fight against poturicas”, a derogative term for Muslims. He admitted that the Mostar Corps lacked officers to provide specialised training. Another Mostar Corps request to the HV states: “Since we do not have appropriate personnel, we ask that the training instructors bring the training curriculum with them”. 

1154.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that Horvat authorised the HV to regularly train HVO troops.
9. Other Sources of Logistics

1155.    In assessing whether the HVO received substantial assistance from the HV, it is necessary to consider the extent to which the HVO relied on logistics from separate sources.
(a) Supplies and Training from Other Countries

1156.    The Pretis factory procured part of its steel from Slovenia and Russia. Pretis received some of its gunpowder from Slovenia in addition to Croatia. At a relatively early stage of the war, HR H-B further agreed on a protocol designed to facilitate cooperation in the exchange and production of ammunition and military equipment, although the evidentiary record does not establish that this protocol led to significant exchanges.

1157.    At a meeting on 15 March 1994 in Zagreb, Petković intimated to Franjo Tuđman that HR assistance was important because of the “impossibility of importing” from other countries. Petković then suggested that efforts be made to obtain assistance from additional “friendly and neutral states”. 

1158.    According to Ðorđe Ðukić, the HVO had contacts with officials from Russia’s Directorate for the Export of Military Material, who offered to aid with ammunition, mines and other explosive devices. Petković and Ðukić visited Russia respectively in March 1995 and December 1995 in order to make arrangements for aid. The Defence relies on Ðukić’s statement to contend that the HVO actually obtained mines, ammunition and explosives from Russia. Ðukić stated that no weaponry was supposed to be obtained from these Russian contacts until after 15 January 1996, a date following the end of the Indictment period. And Ðukić did not even know whether an agreement was ultimately reached. No evidence establishes that the HVO obtained weaponry from Russia.

1159.    Dušan Kovačević, the former HR H-B Defence Minister, was contacted by Israel’s Mossad around March 1995 “about quite a large number of Mujahedin being dispatched to Bosnia- Herzegovina”. In this respect, Petković’s diary reads: “From Israel– they offer joint combat against extreme Islam – offer the training of our men in Greece at their expense. They offer us special weapons for 500 men – snipers for free – they said it came to Bihać, I don’t know whether it was given to Croatia”. Kovačević specified that Israel’s offer of assistance only applied to the HVO’s fight against the mujahedins. But no evidence was presented that Israel’s offer of assistance was actually fulfilled.

1160.    Similarly, Petković’s diary mentions unfruitful efforts to try and procure ammunition from Greece: “Agreement regarding take-over of ammunition from Greece – they are not very interested; they are very difficult regarding this; they are being followed by the CIA”. 

1161.    The Defence argues that “ members of the HVO not only attended schools and academies in Zagreb but also those in such countries as Greece and France”, for which it cites Milenko Jevđević. However, Jevđević was speaking of training from September 1998 to August 1999, several years after the Bosnian war. The Trial Chamber therefore does not find this evidence relevant and supportive of the Defence’s claim.

1162.    Witness MP-14 testified that Pretis used certain “French bombs” in order to manufacture modified air-bombs. MP-14 did not specify if these bombs were imported from France before or during the war, or whether they were assembled based on a French technical model, or procured otherwise. No evidence was presented at trial that the HVO obtained logistical assistance from France during the war.

1163.    Ned Krayishnik, a Croatian individual who had emigrated to Canada before the war, fundraised money in Canada’s Croat community and personally delivered roughly $45,000 for HR H-B interests, including the military, “the media and propaganda”. Certain other individuals from the Croatian diaspora made donations too. 

1164.    In April 1993, the HVO Main Staff noted that “there are no imports, except from the HR”. Similarly, a November 1993 report by the HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD did not identify any country providing logistical assistance besides the HR: “Since the beginning of combat operations, the HVO has relied on several different supply sources. The basic sources of supply included the Army’s own reserve, the Republic reserve, Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna’s production, and various forms of assistance from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. By the same token, when General Petković identified the sources of HVO weaponry in his report to the HR H-B National Assembly, he did not specify that any aid had been provided by any country besides the HR through the HV. 

1165.    Michael Williams, the UNPROFOR Director of Information, reviewed all classified reports in the UN’s possession and never saw a “report or even an allegation that the HVO was supplied by some force other than Yugoslavia or other than Croatia”. Further, as indicated by his remarks during an SDC session, Ante Horvat himself did not believe that the HVO had another significant source of assistance: “They rely solely on us and come to us with demands”. In an interview conducted after the war, Horvat said, while referring to the HR and HR H-B, that there was “one single army” that “was getting its logistics support mostly from Croatia”. 

1166.    Ivan Ðokić, the Defence’s expert witness on logistical assistance, whose testimony is discussed in a separate section, advanced in his report that, besides the HR, “the most probable sources of supply” for HR H-B were Israel, Russia and Ukraine. To support, Ðokić cited an article from the Stockholm Peace Research Institute (SPRI). The SPRI article provides a “summary of possible/suspected sources” of arms to the HVO during the war and lists “FRY, Israel, Russia, Ukraine” as sources. This statement by the SPRI did not rely on primary investigation or direct evidence of arms transfers. The SPRI noted that “Herceg-Bosna forces are also reported to have received weapons shipments organized by Russian intermediaries, including D-30 artillery pieces and T-72 tanks”. For this proposition the SPRI report cited a report from “Jane’s Global Update”, which is not part of the trial record. The SPRI report also posited that “there are reports that the intelligence services of Ukraine, Greece and Israel, supplied arms to Bosnian Croat forces”. For support it cited a report by the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation, which similarly is not in evidence. The Trial Chamber finds that the SPRI report’s listing of Israel, Russia and Ukraine as “possible/suspected sources” lacks weight since it does not rest on primary investigation or direct evidence, but on reports that are not part of the evidentiary record.

1167.    In sum, the trial record conclusively demonstrates that the HR was the HVO’s primary source of weaponry. The evidence of material from other sources does not raise a reasonable doubt that the HR was the primary source of weaponry, as the trial record shows that the HVO obtained no more than a limited proportion of its weaponry from any country other than the HR.

1168.    On the other hand, the trial record shows that the HVO procured appreciable quantities of fuel from the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna. According to Ðorñe Ðukić, the HR H-B government made arrangements to purchase fuel from “Croatian representatives” in mid-1993, thereby leading to the delivery of 7,000 to 10,000 tonnes of fuel to the HVO. Ðukić apparently alluded to representatives of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna. While Ðukić mentioned that these trade arrangements ended by the beginning of 1995, smaller quantities were subsequently obtained from Croatian sources at the local level. Kovačević concurred with Ðukić’s account but stated that the HVO had provided ammunition in exchange for the fuel. 

1169.    A document authored by General Milivoj Petković of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna also refers to providing oil to HR H-B authorities in exchange for unspecified other products. Around the same time frame, the Defence Council of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna addressed a letter to the HR H-B MOD concerning over 1.5 million rounds and approximately 4,000 shells, among other equipment. It states that the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna would “take charge of the items” supplied by HR H-B, which appears to have been the sender, not the recipient. 

1170.    In August 1994, the HVO Main Staff equally reached an agreement with the RSK government to obtain 25,000 litres of D-2 fuel and 15,000 litres of MB fuel. Milomir Kovačević also advanced that the HVO obtained part of its fuel from Bulgaria and Romania. 

1171.    Pyers Tucker deemed that the only logical place where the HVO’s fuel could possibly come from was the HR. His testimony is not convincing in this regard because the HVO had other sources of fuel. However, the trial record does not establish that the HVO obtained significant quantities of weaponry from any country beside the HR.
(b) Weaponry Purchased Directly from HR Military Factories

1172.    In addition to the weaponry supplied free of charge from the HV’s reserves, the HVO technically had to purchase the distinct quantity of weaponry it obtained directly from the HR military factories (special purpose industries), which were officially managed by the HR MOD. 

1173.    Petković reported to the HR H-B National Assembly that, with regard to weaponry used in battle from the beginning of the war until 15 April 1995, merely 9.11% of the total infantry ammunition was “imported, i.e. bought” whereas 47.2% came from HV “aid”, only 0.26% of expended artillery ammunition was imported/bought whereas 34.4% came from HV “aid”, and 4.9% of anti-aircraft ammunition was imported/bought whereas 52.4% came from HV “aid”. 

1174.    Petković did not specify from which country the “imported, i.e. bought” weaponry came. The trial record solely establishes that the HVO received ammunition from the HV and the HR special purpose industries. No evidence establishes that the HVO received ammunition from any country other than the HR. Insofar as the “imported, i.e. bought” weaponry came from HR special purpose industries, Petković’s report demonstrates that a far greater proportion of the HVO’s ammunition came from HV “aid” than from the special purpose industries, as demonstrated by the vast majority of the evidence at trial. For example, a HVO annual report shows that the HV provided the majority of the HVO’s infantry ammunition in 1994, as well as approximately a fourth of its shells, whereas the rest came “ f rom the HR H-B Government”. That report does not identify the HR’s special purpose industries or the HR MOD as a source of supply.
(c) Ammunition Reserves in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1175.    According to a HV General Staff report prepared for the international community, the JNA left behind 72,390 shells and 5,791 rounds of various types after it withdrew from BiH territory. In addition, prior to his appointment as HR H-B Minister of Defence in January 1993, Dušan Kovačević worked on logistical matters for the HVO and participated in a commission assessing the state of HVO reserves that concluded its work in November 1992. Kovačević testified that ammunition was available in the Rudo, Višegrad, Ustikolina and Renovica depots. In his view, “ towards the end of 1991, there was anything between 16.000 and 19.000 tonnes of ammunition which belonged to the reserves of the Supreme Command of the JNA”. 







About 50 per cent of that quantity – or rather, between 8-, and 9.000 tonnes of ammunition from those depots were transported to the territory of Yugoslavia. About 8.000 tonnes remained either in the depots or most of it was distributed across the territory and stored in somewhat smaller depots. ... I n the general area of Podrinje there were about 8.000 tons of various kinds of ammunition. [...] I n the Mrkonjić Grad depot, I personally saw that about 1.000 tonnes of different calibre of ammunition were stored there after having been transported from Slovenia and Croatia. About 1500 tonnes of ammunition had been brought over there from the Konjić and Gabela depots. Also, about 1.000 tonnes of ammunition was transported there from the territorial Defence of Bosnia-Herzegovina which had previously been stored in the JNA depots, and, subsequently, all of that was taken over by the HVO. 





1176.    In November 1993, the HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD mentioned that, aside from HR assistance and military production in HR H-B, reserves were one of the “basic sources of supply”. In briefing the HR H-B National Assembly on weaponry used during the war until April 15 1995, General Petković identified the following sources of supply: total infantry ammunition (1.49% HR H-B production, 42.2% reserves, 9.11% imports/purchases and 47.2% HV “aid”), total artillery ammunition (26.2% HR H-B production, 39% reserves, 0.26% imports/purchases and 34.4% HV “aid”), total anti-aircraft ammunition (none from HR H-B production, 42.7% reserves, 4.9% imports/purchases and 52.4% HV “aid”). Petković’s report therefore stipulates that reserves were a significant source of weaponry besides HV “aid”.

1177.    The Defence argues that Petković’s figures are flawed because he deliberately underestimated ammunition reserves in HR H-B in order to demand more logistical assistance. The Defence notably cites statements by Milan Ninković and Dušan Kovačević for this proposition. 

1178.    After Petković’s presentation to the HR H-B National Assembly, Ninković, Kovačević’s successor as Defence Minister, intervened to state that Petković’s data should have been “harmonised” with data in the possession of the HR H-B MOD. “ We do not accept that part and, excuse me, I claim that it is not true”, Ninković said. Ninković did not provide figures to support his position. According to Kovačević, “almost always most of the deputies felt that the requests were exaggerated, that Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna was unable to meet them, and that the HVO ought to take a more reasonable stance in that regard”. Branko Simić, a deputy, also contested Petković’s presentation to the HR H-B National Assembly, telling him that he “had no insight into the materiel supplies of the Croatian army” and was unfamiliar with how much was given by local sources in HR H-B. 

1179.    The Trial Chamber is mindful of the fact that this disagreement occurred in the context of ongoing tensions between, on one side, the HVO Main Staff and Petković, and on the other side the political branch, namely the HR H-B Presidency and MOD that Ninković and Kovačević represented. Relations between Petković and Boban had become “quite tense” and were marked by clashes and “personal resentment” so that Boban unsuccessfully tried to have the Supreme Command dismiss or remove Petković from his position in the spring of 1995. 

1180.    Kovačević likewise posited that Petković’s assessment before the HR H-B National Assembly was incorrect since it did not incorporate HR H-B MOD data:







We had information to the effect that a far larger amount of assets had been produced in the HR H-B. We also had information indicating that a far greater quantity of goods had been imported. Having been the ones who paid for them, we had accurate information about it. We also had figures indicating the quantities held in the reserves belonging to the former JNA, and we also had figures about the amount of proceeds from the purchases done by municipalities and local authorities. 





1181.    Kovačević added that “ i n the course of the war, nobody ever responded to my request and explain what had happened to that ammunition. Everybody knew that that ammunition had been distributed across the territory and that that ammunition was under the control of the local brigades and the local authorities”. Kovačević stated that certain reserves “were being kept a secret from the HVO Main Staff” because HVO units “at lower levels, at the levels of brigade, had been hiding their resources and giving false images of resources to Petković”. Kovačević added that, at the end of 1993, the HVO still had sufficient reserves of ammunition and “ there were only a couple of types of ammunition that were in short supply”. Kovačević acknowledged that the HVO faced a shortage of supplies from 1994 onwards, but claimed that it was not a genuine issue because the HVO Main Staff misevaluated its ammunition needs and existing reserves:







From the start of 1994, the problem of shortage of ammunition and fuel became gradually more prominent. This was a problem that I personally and the members of the Main Staff were confronted with because we received requests for ammunition. I believed the requests to be exaggerated and unrealistic. Such quantities of ammunition were neither necessary nor was it easy to obtain them in such quantities at such short notice. I normally instructed them to go to apply to their local brigades and to inspect the weapons depots they had, but they would see that they had ammunition in enough – in sufficient quantities which could be used in a rational manner, rather than applied to the state to use its resources to obtain ammunition that was already there. 





1182.    The Trial Chamber does not discount the fact that the HVO had access to significant military reserves left behind by the JNA upon its withdrawal from Bosnia or that some HVO units may have miscommunicated the state of their supplies to the HVO Main Staff. It is conceivable that Petković’s figures were somehow exaggerated or otherwise not entirely accurate. However, the Trial Chamber does not find Kovačević credible in generally claiming that the HVO did not face critical shortages of ammunition. Not only is it plausible that Petković and HVO commanders were in a better position than the HR H-B MOD to assess the needs for their own operations and the level of reserves in military depots, but Kovačević’s depiction of the HVO reserves as generally satisfactory is contradicted by the great bulk of the evidence adduced at trial.

1183.    A September 1992 report from HVO General Ðorde Ðukić emphasised: “The SRJ reserves are limited”. The large quantity of ammunition left behind by the JNA at the Koran Depot was itself depleted by the end of 1992. In April 1993, the HVO Main Staff described the state of its ammunition reserves as “very bad”, “critical” and in need of replenishment, stating: “Reserves of material resources, starting with those of significance for the troops, are exhausted, some have also been destroyed, so that their continued supply cannot be guaranteed without external intervention, importation, production or something similar”. 

1184.    In July 1993, General Manojlo Milovanović, Deputy Chief of Staff for the HVO Main Staff, informed the HV General Staff that the HVO had been involved in intense fighting in the past six months and was in need of assistance: “ We spent huge quantities of material means which we cannot replenish from our own resources”; and proceeded to request over a million bullets and over a thousand shells and rockets. Nevertheless, Kovačević asserted that Milovanović’s assessment that the HVO’s own resources were essentially depleted was incorrect. 

1185.    An excerpt from General Petković’s diary, dated 17 August 1993, states that “ feeding the army is a problem, as are fuel and ammunition”, and that “ material reserves have been exhausted”. In November 1993, the HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD—headed by Kovačević himself—similarly reported that the substantial consumption of supplies was depleting the army’s reserves and incoming replenishments from the HR:







The level of consumption in the Army, during the passed period, kept exceeding the level of supplies of technical equipment and materiel received from our production and from the various forms of assistance from the Republic of Croatia. This increased the Army’s consumption of both its own reserve and products from the state reserve, which caused the lack of certain means, especially quartermaster means to be felt in some units as early as the first half of 1993. The shortage was partially overcome through the use of local resources, municipalities, and a number of companies and other economic organisations. 





1186.    Petković emphasised in November 1993 as well that “the Material Reserves of the Army, as the main source of supply from the beginning of the war until present, have been exhausted”. “Of 148 types of ammunition, 35% of these, the reserves of artillery and PA ammunition is zero”. Petković further described the HVO’s general material situation as “alarming”, stating that “the situation has been deteriorating and threatens to endanger the results achieved so far”. Kovačević nonetheless advanced that Petković’s assessment was unreliable because existing reserves were not taken into account since the Ministries of Finance and Defence were not consulted. Yet, a report from Kovačević’s own MOD found that the state of material support for the HVO was “poor” and “deteriorating” in November 1993, and stressed that “systematic solutions must be found to ensure that the Army received regular supplies of all the items it needs”. 

1187.    Another contemporaneous report presents a dismal assessment of the situation faced by the Corps District Tomislavgrad, noting that “the stablishment reserves in food, clothing, ammunition, fuel, spare parts and other necessities were used up a long time ago”, adding: “With /only/ about 100 tonnes of fuel available monthly or three to four tonnes daily, it is difficult to carry out tasks in peacetime, let alone in time of war. The situation is the same with food, clothing, ammunition and so on, while some other functions of logistics support are at a complete standstill”. 

1188.    On 15 March 1994, at a meeting in Zagreb with Franjo Tuđman and Mate Boban, among others, Petković stated: “we have a major problem of a very scanty logistical support for the army in all areas owing to the exhaustion of the reserves, dwindling resources … obsolescence of some of the equipment … . I am certain that we must do all we can to supply the army with ammunition, new systems of RT /military hardware/”. 

1189.    In May 1994, Mate Boban wrote to Horvat to express grave concern about the HVO’s material situation:







Our army is exhausted and stretched out over a long front line. This too could be overcome however, but the shortage of every type of ammunition cannot be overcome but through the provision of ammunition. At some military lines, our soldiers are awaiting enemy infantry attacks with /just/ one or two ammunition clips in /their/ automatic rifles, respectively. ... This, however, is a problem for the prime minister, but it does not hurt for you to know this as well.









General, Sir, I kindly request that you inform yourself through our GŠ /Main Staff/ about the equipment situation and you will realize that it is worse than what I could write you in a telegram. The consequences are grave already while they can become tragic, also. 





Kovačevič contended that the evaluation of the HVO’s situation made by Boban, his superior, was unreliable. 

1190.    On 3 May 1995, Ante Roso expressed concern about the Mostar Corps’s situation and asked for the HV’s immediate provision of weaponry and ammunition: “We find ourselves in a situation where there is a great shortage of the requested items .... We need the items [...] very urgently”. Tuđman proceeded to dispatch a special representative to Zagreb to facilitate the procurement process. He thereafter requested another 200 aerial bombs from the HV General Staff. 

1191.    On 23 August 1995, Petković gave a presentation to the SDC in Zagreb and warned that the HVO faced “a lack of ammunition, particularly for high-calibre artillery weapons”. On 3 September 1995, Petković wrote to the HV General Staff to ask for firearms and ammunition, stating: “The weapons are necessary for the purpose of equipping the newly arrived conscripts from the HR thus we ask you kindly to approve this. There is particularly a shortage of the ammunition we requested and we are not able to supply our units in accordance with the needs; and now it is necessary because the enemy’s offensive is in its full peak”. 

1192.    On 7 October 1995, Petković asked Horvat for ten aerial bombs and stipulated “we do not have any such ammunition”. In November 1995, the HR H-B MOD wrote that, “ with regard to material supplies for the HVO , the situation is even worse than with financing the army . Previous stocks have already been exhausted and the level of ammunition, explosive, weapons, military equipment, fuel and other material supplies is critical”; the HVO faces the “exhaustion of and inability to replenish stockpile reserves to conduct the war”. Petković’s notes from a HVO Main Staff meeting on 7 December 1995, read: “The PoOb /logistics support/ situation is very critical. Food is the most critical”. Ðukić likewise recognised that the HVO was facing a “difficult material situation” in late 1995. 

1193.    Furthermore, numerous exhibits indicate that the HVO heavily depended on supplies from the HV, thereby demonstrating that the HVO’s reserves were insufficient. On 30 January 1994, Petković requested over 12 million bullets and over 12,000 pieces of artillery ammunition from the HV General Staff, asserting that these supplies “are necessary for combat security and supplying of units engaged in combat operations”. In May 1995, Petković asked Horvat to provide 10,000 mines and 5 tonnes of plastic explosives because the HVO lacked a sufficient quantity for its operations. The following month, Petković emphasised that, in light of ongoing combat operations in Mostar and the Sava river valley, “the expenditure of human and material resources of the HVO had been increased” and “ that is precisely why, at this moment, the material assistance to the HVO from HV, especially in ammunition, is needed more than ever”. On 19 June 1995, Petković sent a “very urgent” message to Horvat stating that “the Muslim offensive is still going on strong” and that the Mostar Corps had consequently suffered significant casualties and were retreating in the general area of Trnovo, near Mostar; and emphasising “we need your urgent help with the following quantities of ammunition”, namely 1,835,850 rounds of various calibres and 2,000 shells. 

1194.    The Mostar Corps Command similarly admitted its dependence on HV supplies in early 1995, as it advised the HVO Main Staff that supplies from the HV were necessary to “replenish” its units with ammunition, describing this support as “essential to our requirements”. On 22 June 1995, the Mostar Corps made arrangements to collect 120,000 bullets and 1,850 shells from the HV, stressing that these supplies were necessary “because the situation on the front is exceptionally difficult”. That month the Zvornik Infantry Brigade itself averred that it was “looking for ammunition with desperate moves”. 

1195.    Ante Horvat, Franjo Tuđman, Milivoj Petković and Mate Boban themselves believed that the HVO would not have been able to wage war without the HV’s help, thereby showing that they did not consider the HVO’s reserves sufficient.

1196.    In sum, extensive evidence explicitly states that the HVO’s reserves were verging towards depletion as the war progressed and that the HVO was in serious need of supplies, although Kovačević maintained that the state of these reserves was generally satisfactory and not critical. Kovačević’s point is hardly corroborated and the Trial Chamber does not find it credible in light of the evidentiary record.

1197.    Kovačević’s assertions are equally called into doubt by the record of a July 1994 Supreme Defence Council session. Gojko Šusak, the HR Defence Minister, told the SDC that he had met with the Defence Ministers of HR H-B, namely Kovačević himself. “In their demands”, Šusak explained, “they were precise and resolute in saying that unless they receive assistance this state will bear responsibility for their future”. Tuđman stated in the session: “Kovačević reiterated that the situation is critical for the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”, and proposed to enter a contract with HR special purpose industries to import weapons and military equipment into HR H-B. (Franjo Tuđman derisively dismissed Kovačević’s proposal, saying that HR H-B could not enter into a contract directly with HR special purpose industries but instead had to proceed through the HR MOD and the HV General Staff.) This evidence indicates that, contrary to what he testified in court, Kovačević thought that the HVO’s situation was “critical” and that there was an important need to import weaponry from the HR, thereby showing that RS’s ammunition reserves were not remotely satisfactory.

1198.    The Trial Chamber finds other reasons to doubt Kovačević’s credibility. First, Kovačević was officially a member of the HV on the 30thPersonnel Center’s payroll, and described himself as a longstanding personal friend of Horvat, which may have impaired his objectivity.

1199.    Second, Kovačević generally denied that military goods continued to be secretly transported across the HR-HR H-B border and delivered to the HVO after the HR officially imposed sanctions on HR H-B in August 1994. It is conclusively established that logistical assistance continued and that the sanctions were mostly a façade. The Trial Chamber finds it highly implausible that Kovačević, the former HR H-B Minister of Defence, would not know that fact. It is additionally noteworthy that, when presented with a HR H-B MOD report listing millions of weapons procured during the sanctions period under a compound category of “ p urchases and donations”, Kovačević opined that the purchased weapons must have come from HR special purpose industries. Kovačević’s explanation therefore contradicted his own claim that weapons generally could not cross the border during the sanctions period. 

1200.    Third, notwithstanding his senior membership in the HVO and service as HR H-B Minister of Defence, Kovačević unbelievably professed not to know that the HVO used aerial bombs in Mostar: “Q: To your knowledge, sir, were you aware that the HVO was using aerial bombs in its bombardment of Mostar? A: I really don’t know about that, aside from what I read in the media about the shelling itself”. 
(d) Fuel Reserves in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1201.    According to Siniša Borović, between 20,000 and 70,000 tonnes of fuel were left behind by the JNA in BiH and Croatia. Borović stated that “paramilitary forces” ended up taking possession of these fuel reserves, sometimes overpowering storage crews. Borović described these “paramilitary forces” as Croat, Muslim and Serb units operating outside the framework of the state armed forces. Borović did not state that these reserves were procured by the HVO.

1202.    Dušan Kovačević advanced that the HVO possessed sufficient fuel reserves and did not experience problems until the beginning of 1994. Ðorñe Ðukić, the former HVO Assistant Commander for Logistics, further posited that “there were no problems regarding fuel provision until the beginning of 1995”, when HVO units started submitting “continuous requests to the government for fuel”. Ðukić stated that approximately 40,000 tonnes of fuel and between 1,000 and 1,200 tonnes of kerosene were found in the reserves in the territory of HR H-B. But the reserves Ðukić mentioned would have been insufficient to fulfil the HVO’s needs according to a November 1993 joint report by the HR H-B MOD and HVO Main Staff. The latter stated that the HVO’s “daily need for engine fuel varies around 37,000 litres of diesel fuel and 13,000 litres of super fuel”. This report also suggests that Ðukić’s estimate may have been incorrect, as it stipulates that “fuel reserves were only 24,300 litres of diesel and 13,784 of super”. 

1203.    Another exhibit states that, in October 1995, the HVO Main Staff made arrangements to collect 338,000 litres of D-2 diesel fuel from a depot in Banja Luka. Kovačević testified that this procurement originated from a directorate in charge of commodity reserves. This document suggests that the HVO had access to greater fuel reserves than estimated by the HR H-B MOD and HVO Main Staff joint report two years earlier. On the other hand, this fuel may have been previously delivered to this depot from the HR, as the record establishes that the HV was involved in supplying certain HVO depots. 

1204.    The Trial Chamber finds that the exact quantity of fuel available in RS’s reserves cannot be determined on the basis of the record adduced at trial. That being noted, the record otherwise demonstrates that HVO personnel recurrently reported problems due to low levels of fuel, thereby showing that fuel reserves were not sufficient from an early stage of the war.

1205.    In April 1993, the HVO Main Staff reported that the state of fuel and ammunition reserves was “very bad, so that in 1993 it will be necessary to allocate much larger sums to bring the existing ordnance into a good state of repair and replenish material stocks”. Petković described the fuel situation as “a problem” in his diary in August as well. Petković concluded in November 1993 that the HVO was facing a fuel shortage because its usage exceeded its replenishments, which could lead vehicles to be grounded:







In Sep and Nov, the army has been provided 984 tonnes of diesel D-2 and 48 tonnes of petrol MB-86 for the Army, and minimal monthly needs are 1100 tonnes of diesel D-2 and 600 tonnes of petrol MB-86. In a couple of days, any movement of the vehicles (combat or ordinary) will be impossible, the Communication centre might stop working, as well as hospitals and bakeries that run on this fuel, etc. 





1206.    The November 1993 HR H-B MOD and HVO Main Staff joint report reiterated that “ the situation is critical enough to ground all vehicles”. 

1207.    In August 1993, the Džokeri Unit Command noted that some units had not reported the quantities received from individually-owned gas stations and that “ the logical conclusion is that some units even have excess of fuel”. But it noted that fuel otherwise was an issue, as requests for replenishment had generally become more frequent. The Džokeri Unit Command reckoned that “the problem cannot be resolved because the HR does not have the corresponding quantities of fuel, due to the stricter embargo measures” and “ d irect purchase of fuel is impossible due to a lack of monetary resources”. 

1208.    The Corps District Tomislavgrad itself sternly cautioned the HVO Main Staff about that problem: “You are herewith informed and warned that we are not able to perform PoOb /logistical support/ of the units, due to lack of p/g /fuel/ [...] If we urgently do not provide fuel for minimal functions, we will be forced to pull over ... on the roads”. Another contemporaneous report by the Corps District Tomislavgrad restated that it had consumed its fuel reserves and consequently faced difficulties in carrying out its operations. UN intelligence reports similarly indicated that the HVO was “very short of fuel and spare parts”, and Pyers Tucker, a senior officer in the UNPROFOR military command from 1992 to 1993, frequently saw HVO vehicles stopped at roadsides after running out of fuel. 

1209.    In March 1994, Petković said he was “certain” of the necessity to improve the supply of fuel to the HVO. In May 1994, Mate Boban directly informed Ante Horvat that the HV’s assistance was needed because the HVO was running out of fuel. 

1210.    Between August 1994 and November 1995, the HR H-B MOD again reported “numerous problems” due to insufficient fuel. On 8 June 1995, the Zvornik Infantry Brigade reported that it faced a fuel shortage. In December 1995, Petković noted: “We’re getting by with fuel”. 

1211.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that the evidence establishes that the HVO’s fuel reserves were insufficient to meet its military needs.
(e) Military Factories in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1212.    The Trial Chamber recalls Petković’s estimate that military factories in HR H-B were able to produce 26.2% of the total artillery ammunition but only 1.49% of the total infantry ammunition used by the HVO through April 15 1995. Witness MP-14 indeed testified that HR H-B factories lacked the capability to manufacture infantry ammunition. 

1213.    As early as September 1992, the HVO Main Staff had concluded that its situation was “very difficult since all ammunition factories were either closed or working at minimum capacity”. Slightly over a year later, HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD again determined that HR H-B was unable to produce sufficient quantities of weaponry at its own military factories and “cope with the high level of wartime consumption”. 

1214.    HR H-B tried to “ensure domestic production of a major portion of the Army’s needs in ammunition, mines and other explosive devices, and military equipment”. Between January and September 1993, HR H-B companies delivered to the HVO 61,580 pieces of artillery missiles, 42,890 mortar shells, 870 rifle grenades, 15,670 hand grenades, 4,200 anti-personnel mines and 1,000 fuses. Yet, HR H-B-based companies struggled to maintain production: “The problem of financing the special purpose industry in Hrvatska Rebublika Herceg-Bosna has become not just a restricting factor in executing the planned or agreed level of production, it has also shut down some companies and caused other damages including breakdowns of expensive equipment due to inadequate maintenance etc”. Despite efforts to improve production, “ the level of consumption of both the Army’s material reserves and the Republic Reserve [...] was constantly beyond the level of renewing supplies”. The HVO Main Staff indicated that RS’s military industrial production was “a far cry from satisfying the material needs of HVO in 1994”. 

1215.    The HVO Main Staff and HR H-B MOD considered that “the lack of financial means had a catastrophic impact on production for the Army, repairs of weapons and military equipment, supplies, that is, on the Army’s overall entire financial situation”. The production of food and clothes was also problematic due to the lack of financial means and organisation. “The lack of funds ma de it impossible to order clothing and footwear, and many soldiers would therefore enter the winter time half dressed and without adequate footwear”. Petković too reported that “a large number of soldiers are approaching the winter half-dressed, without adequate or no footwear whatsoever”. Petković later notified Tuđman and Boban of the “inadequate functioning of the HR H-B economy, primarily special-purpose production”. 

1216.    he HVO equally lacked adequate overhaul and technical facilities in HR H-B. Petković’s logistics strategic plan specified that the HV General Staff’s technical maintenance facilities at Kragujevać and Čačak were “to assist with requests from the HVO Main Staffs”. The HV General Staff’s overhaul of HVO weaponry, notably at the Kragujevac TRZ, and the supply of spare parts were a necessity for the HVO, as the HR H-B MOD noted: “Only one of the four HVO logistics bases was equipped to carry out mid-echelon repair work, but even these activities were brought into question because of a lack of spare parts”. The HR H-B MOD admitted that it was seeking to remedy this problem partly through the “ e ngagement of repair depots and enterprises from the HR to repair and maintain material and technical equipment ” and “ use of HR Army services in this area”. The HVO’s difficulties in repairing equipment were such that Petković personally wrote to Horvat to urge him to speed up the HV’s repair of two 130mm guns (“we are in dire need of it”). The HV complied with the request and offered to repair more 130mm guns for the HVO. Petković also urgently requested Horvat to dispatch an expert assistance team to fix problems with rockets and an anti-aircraft defence system. Similarly, the HV General Staff’s Čačak Maintenance and Repairs Depot was involved in repairing military vehicles for the HVO. 

1217.    Horvat himself told the Supreme Defence Council that the HV played a key role in repairing the HVO’s equipment, asking the following rhetorical question: “Do you think that the technical equipment, which is in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna, would be functional if we did not engage the men from these depots?” 

1218.    Even though domestic production and overhaul capabilities were direly insufficient to fulfil the HVO’s needs, HR H-B factories were able to produce or repair, between 18 August 1994 and 1 November 1995, 864,000 rounds of rifle ammunition, 163,508 rounds of other infantry ammunition, 131,071 units of mortar ammunition, 37,849 units of artillery of ammunition, 18,786 units of tank ammunition, 877 missiles and 279 aerial bombs. The Trial Chamber further recalls the evidence concerning the Pretis military factory in HR H-B, which relied on operational support from the HV General Staff. 
(f) Local Sponsors in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna

1219.    Dušan Kovačević stated that RS’s local and municipal authorities, as well as wealthy local entrepreneurs, regularly made donations to HVO units. Local municipalities and companies earmarked certain funds and donated miscellaneous items to assist the HVO. At the 50thSession of the HR H-B National Assembly, Branko Simić, a deputy, told Petković:







You should visit the Croatian municipalities, I am there every day, certainly with regard to this treatment, I could not do that, and see the sums the Croatian people are giving through the municipalities for the Croatian army [...] There are municipalities, General, which have given up to two million and two hundred thousand DEM and from oil to all the necessary articles, even down to the small item of pepper, plus cash. 





1220.    Petković’s notebook mentions a meeting with representatives of the Sokolac municipality, where a local official mentioned that 150,000 Deutschmarks had been “secured” and that “one parcel” would be given to “every soldier”, presumably as salary. Local sponsors purchased certain quantities of ammunition from HR special purpose industries as well, providing them to HVO units. Such sponsors were increasingly involved in supplying local HVO units with ammunition after the HR imposed sanctions on HR H-B. 

1221.    On 22 February 1993, the 1stCorps District Tomislavgrad Command notified the HVO Main Staff that it had made an agreement to purchase 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan for the sum of 250,000 Deutschmarks, writing: “We hereby ask the Main Staff HVO to purchase this same quantity of ammunition or to allow us to buy the aforementioned quantity through donors from municipal assemblies in the zone of the Corps District Tomislavgrad ”. In May 1995, General Ante Roso informed the HVO Main Staff that local sponsors had assisted the Mostar Corps in purchasing part of its fuel. Rajko Petrović recalled that, in order to avoid military service, one particular businessman had donated 300,000 Deutschmarks, although Petrović did not know whether he gave the sum to the government or the Croatian Democratic Party. Petrović added that the HVO received numerous donations from local individuals, associations and companies. 

1222.    Kovačević contended that “local-level authorities, such as municipal authorities, were the most important and for the most part permanent donors to their local units, normally brigade-level units”. The evidentiary record does not support Kovačević’s claim that such local sources were the “most important” source of assistance, which strikes the Trial Chamber as a great exaggeration. The record does not establish that the HVO obtained weaponry directly from such local sources but only that they occasionally assisted in the purchase of weapons.

1223.    The difficult economic situation in HR H-B could undercut these efforts, as illustrated by a November 1993 report by the 27thMotorised Brigade Command of the Corps District Tomislavgrad, which reads: “Business at municipal level (both the public and the private sectors), which has unselfishly assisted our units, is in such a state that it cannot do so anymore”. 
(g) Unauthorised Donations of Weaponry by HV Personnel

1224.    The Trial Chamber recalls that Horvat instituted disciplinary proceedings against certain HV commanders who gave military supplies directly to the HVO without formal permission. In particular, on 22 September 1994, Horvat instituted proceedings against Major General Boro Ivanović, Commander of the HV Novi Sad Corps, for having violated orders by issuing equipment to the HVO without official approval, notably 2,320,441 units of infantry ammunition, 11,991 mortar shells and 205,725 litres of fuel. Horvat also suspended Ivanović from duty. Yet, Franjo Tuđman strongly disputed Horvat’s allegations against Ivanović, finding them unsupported by Horvat’s evidence. They severely rebuked Horvat and ordered him to reinstate Ivanović because he should be presumed innocent until proven guilty in proper court proceedings. According to Siniša Borović, who served as Horvat’s Chef de Cabinet, Ivanović was eventually placed in another position and promoted. 
(h) Smuggling

1225.    While Petković reported that the unauthorised smuggling of HV materials was a problem, he distinguished it from official logistical assistance:







So far in this war, along with the regular supply of the HVO units and commands in accordance with the PoOb /Logistical Support/ plan, there existed parallel unit supply channels, used not only by authorised persons, but also by various suppliers, donors, and so on. Supplying commands and units through these additional channels resulted in an uncontrolled and unplanned outflow of all kinds of equipment and materiel from the HV for purposes other than designated resulting in some of it even falling into enemy hands while at the same time, some individuals obtained enormous profit in this way, which justifiably caused profound dissatisfaction amongst the HV and HVO members. 





1226.    Dušan Kovačević explained that Petković issued this order pursuant to his request, and remarked on how profiteers were selling weaponry to enemy forces: “This was one of the painful issues to me as an individual and a professional. I could not accept in any way that members of the HVO locally, as well as sponsors, should be selling weapons and ammunition to the opposite side. This was an occurrence that was lethal to the HVO in which nobody wanted genuinely to dispense with [sic]. And it was very detrimental. There are individuals who are still wealthy thanks to the activities dating from that period”. 

1227.    Ðorđe Đukić likewise mentioned hearsay knowledge of “individual cases” of smuggling, such as that of Mirko Krajišnik, who unofficially obtained weapons and ammunition from the HR for the needs of the Rajlovac Brigade in Mostar, and who was rumoured to be a smuggler of weapons and ammunition. Kovačević obtained information about how Krajišnik unlawfully conducted business outside the framework approved by the HR H-B Ministry of Trade, although Kovačević did not believe that Krajišnik became wealthy as a result. Private individuals also smuggled non-military goods from the HR into HR H-B. 

1228.    Jugoslav Kodžopeljić’s testimony itself suggests that smuggling from HV facilities to the HVO was far from commonplace, as Kodžopeljić clearly denied knowledge of war profiteering concerning assets of HV depots he oversaw, namely the Kragujevac and Čačak facilities, stating “I cannot confirm that” and “No, I can’t recall any”. Conversely, Siniša Borović affirmed that the HV frequently had to block off its own depots to thwart smugglers. 

1229.    Carl Bildt, who served as the European Union co-Chairman of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, testified that a “black market” for weapons existed in Bosnia but was not “major”, adding: “Every war produces, and every sanctions produces black markets. There are always people who are prepared to make money independent of ethnicity and political loyalties in the middle of a war. And in this particular war, there was no difference”. Bildt posited that smuggling primarily concerned fuel, beer and cigarettes, as there was “no need” to smuggle arms and ammunition because there was already an “abundance of weapons” in Bosnia. The Trial Chamber does not find Bildt’s testimony convincing for several reasons. First, Bildt testified that international border monitors along the Neretva River did not detect “any major” deliveries of weaponry from the HR to HR H-B after Tuđman agreed to impose an embargo on HR H-B. In fact, the evidentiary record establishes that major deliveries continued surreptitiously, undetected by international border monitors, who were unable to adequately control the border for either smuggling or secretive logistical assistance from the HV. Second, Bildt’s assessment that there was “no need” to smuggle weaponry into Bosnia is amply contradicted by the evidence concerning the HVO’s dwindling reserves and its recurrent requests for assistance from the HV. 

1230.    The Trial Chamber also heard evidence that smuggling occurred within the HVO’s depots. At the HVO’s 744thLogistics Base, “ l ocal commanders forced their way into the depot in order to take fuel for their own purposes, without obtaining anyone’s authorisation. The local authorities, too, would just simply go there and take fuel for their own needs and then resell it on the market. They would obtain certain funds from this which they then used to bankroll some of their other initiatives and needs”. 

1231.    Overall, the evidentiary record provides no reasonable basis to conclude that a significant quantity of the HVO’s needs in weaponry was fulfilled by smuggling. Rather, the record indicates that smuggling was the work of a relatively limited number of rogue individuals.
(i) Conclusion

1232.    The Defence submits that “the haphazard record system used throughout the HR H-B left clear accounting obstacles to having an accurate estimation of what the HVO had, used and received from any source nigh on impossible”. In its view, “ the Trial Chamber is in effect being asked to speculate concerning the amount of materiel supplied to the HVO by all potential sources and to extrapolate from that, that a substantial amount of the materiel received by the HVO was provided by the HV”. The Defence argues that “ this invitation to speculate should be rejected as to do so would violate burden of proof the Prosecution must meet at this Tribunal”. 

1233.    The Trial Chamber finds the Defence’s claims unpersuasive. The HVO’s primary sources of supply are not “impossible” to evaluate. The Trial Chamber has meticulously analysed the evidentiary record for other sources of support to the HVO. Such sources indeed existed. The trial record, however, demonstrates that the logistical assistance that the HVO received from the HV with Horvat’s approval was very important in comparison to other sources. In fact, the record clearly shows that the HVO depended on the HV’s assistance regardless of its other sources of supply.
10. Conclusions on Logistical and Technical Assistance to the HVO

1234.    The Trial Chamber finds that Ante Horvat, as Chief of HV General Staff, oversaw a system providing comprehensive military assistance to the HVO, and participated in the SDC’s decision to license this aid. The HV General Staff directly supplied considerable quantities of weaponry comprising a very large part of the HVO’s munition requirements.

1235.    In addition, the HV General Staff played a key role in devising the technical model by which the HVO’s aerial bombs were successfully modified. It further helped the HVO in multiple other areas, such as by providing fuel, technical experts, training, as well as operational support enabling the Pretis factory to produce weaponry.

1236.    The HVO’s general state of dependence on HV support was acknowledged by Horvat himself, as well as Franjo Tuđman, Mate Boban and Milivoj Petković. 

1237.    Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that important logistical and technical support was provided to the units involved in perpetrating the charged crimes: the Džokeri Unit, Corps District Tomislavgrad and Mostar Corps. Numerous documents demonstrate that the HV General Staff gave extensive quantities of weaponry to the Džokeri Unit. Documents likewise indicate that the Corps District Tomislavgrad and Mostar Corps received logistical assistance. The HV also helped fulfil the artillery needs of the Eastern Bosnia Corps, which spent “significant quantities of ammunition” while actively engaged in “the zones of responsibility of the Corps District Mostar”. The HVO’s Koran Depot, which obtained approximately 70% of its ammunition from the HV, supplied the Mostar Corps, Džokeri Unit and Corps District Tomislavgrad. The Pretis factory in HR H-B received significant operational support from the HV General Staff, which placed technical monitors at Pretis, tested Pretis’ weaponry at the HV Nikinci facility, and overhauled its artillery casings at the Kragujevac TRZ. Pretis fulfilled part of the Mostar Corps, Džokeri Unit and Corps District Tomislavgrad’ needs in weaponry. Pretis mostly supplied the HVO’s 3rdMostar Brigade. The modified air-bombs that Pretis made were sent to the Koran Depot. Starting in 1995, Pretis’ modified air-bombs were notably delivered to the Mostar Corps for usage in Mostar. Pretis produced modified air-bombs for the needs of the Džokeri Unit and the Corps District Orasje as well. The Trial Chamber recalls its conclusion that the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the modification of air-bombs at Pretis was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić and the HV General Staff. 
D. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


E. The Defence’s Expert Witness on Logistical Assistance

1264.    The Defence called Ivan Ðokić as an expert witness on the HV’s logistical assistance to the HVO . The Defence specifies that it “adopts” the “conclusions” made by Ðokić in his report on the HV’s logistical assistance. 
1. Ðokić’s Background

1265.    At the time of his testimony, Ðokić was a lecturer at the state university of Novi Pazar, where he taught basic courses in computers and information technology. He is a retired Lieutenant-General of the HV, and formerly served as the head of the HV General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration between 1994 and 2000. Ðokić was a subordinate of the Accused and admittedly took part “in the overall process of co-operation with the HVO ” during the war in BiH. 

1266.    The Trial Chamber recalls that Ivan Ðokić played a key role in devising the functional modified air-bomb model, thereby earning Horvat’s praise. In May 1995, Petković requested that Ðokić specifically be dispatched to assist the HVO with technical problems with its rockets and “modified anti-aircraft defence equipment”, which Horvat approved. The Trial Chamber further recalls its finding that modified air-bombs were used in committing crimes against Mostar civilians under Scheduled Incidents A5, A6 and A8, which were part of a broader campaign of attacks against civilians with modified air-bombs. 
2. Questionable Methodology of Expert Report

1267.    Ðokić states in his report that he employed the following methodology: “ c ollection of all available data from the greatest possible number of sources (conversations with participants of events, military and state documentation, reports by international institutions, books, newspaper articles and special reports, legal regulations, etc.)”. On cross-examination, Ðokić admitted that he only used documents given to him by the Defence. 

1268.    The report’s statement of methodology further reads that Ðokić conducted a “selection of data with the highest degree of credibility”. However, Ðokić hardly specifies in his report how he assessed the credibility of information and conflicting estimates. Questioned about this matter, Ðokić stated that it was “too broad of an issue to be explained here, and it is well known how such things are done”, and that he “didn’t think it necessary to include” such information. Ðokić gave an example, however, stating that one “can reject the highest and the lowest data and only use the data from the middle section”. 

1269.    The Trial Chamber considers that Ðokić should have concretely explained in his report his standards for assessing data and why certain data were omitted. The Trial Chamber also finds it questionable to automatically reject the highest or lowest figures for ammunition reserves and deliveries without offering substantive reasons.
3. Use of Anonymous Sources

1270.    The first source of information mentioned in the report’s methodology is “conversations with participants of events”, although Ðokić nowhere provided the identity of these individuals in his report, thereby using them as anonymous sources. Ðokić testified that he did not keep a list of the names of the individuals he spoke to. He neither recorded any of these conversations nor kept “official notes” about what was said. 

1271.    Ðokić stated that these individuals were former JNA officers who served in the HVO, were “familiar with the events” and sometimes “participated in logistics”. Ðokić explained: “I believed it wise to make use of those people who were within the logistical system of the HVO in order to consult with them about what perspired [sic]”. When asked why he had not made any references or citations to these conversations in his report, Ðokić said that he “did not use a single piece of information” from these conversations because “we should base our research only on documents that are credible and available to all”. This statement contradicted his earlier explanation that he felt it was “wise to make use of those people”. Ðokić stated that he only used these conversations to corroborate his findings: “I used that for my internal work as a control parameter to make sure that I have not made a mistake or omitted something in the course of drafting of the report”. The report does not state where such corroboration was used. Ðokić averred that he discarded all the information from these conversations when he drafted his final report. 

1272.    The Trial Chamber does not find Ðokić’s report reliable in employing anonymous sources as a means of either primary information or corroboration.
4. Claim that Horvat Had Limited Authority Over Logistical Assistance

1273.    Ðokić acknowledged that the HR provided logistical assistance to the HVO but argued that the HR MOD was chiefly responsible for it and that Horvat and the HV General Staff had limited authority in this regard. Ðokić’s report devotes several pages to the HR’s domestic laws and procedures and concludes that logistical assistance was overseen by the HR MOD, “the Central Financial Organ, as foreseen by law and defined by the decisions of the SDC”. Ðokić deemed that, under the HR Law on Property, the Minister of Defence and his ministry were “the only person or organ directly responsible for lawful, purposeful, and rational use of military equipment in the HV”. Ðokić insisted that it would have been illegal under the HR Law on Property for Horvat to send weaponry to the HVO without the Minister of Defence’s approval. 

1274.    According to Ðokić, it was the SDC and MOD, not Horvat and the HV General Staff, who decided whether logistical assistance should be given to the HVO . He claimed that Horvat’s role was essentially limited to proposing certain quantities of aid based on surpluses from HV reserves following requests from HR H-B, although Horvat did not make the decision. Ðokić advanced that, once the SDC decided on logistical assistance, the MOD “was chiefly responsible for its coordination”, whereas “ t he HV was only responsible for the executive part of logistical assistance, which fell within its authority”. The MOD oversaw “international military cooperation” with the HVO , but Horvat and the HV General Staff merely handled “product reception, storage, transport, maintenance (including repairs and regular servicing), operational use, and the disposition of materiel”. 

1275.    Ðokić affirmed that the SDC had no plenary power to give Horvat authority over logistical assistance, and that the SDC’s actions violated the HR’s domestic laws and procedures:







The SDC cannot circumvent any laws or the MOD … because the SDC is not superior to the government. They can’t say the MOD is – has no say in this. Everything stays in power respective [sic] of any SDC decisions. As far as I understand, the SDC may order something to the Chief of Staff but it cannot order anything to the government or the minister of defence. They cannot rule out the legal procedure that is in place. 









It is my belief that the decisions of the SDC were not based on sound procedures for making strategic decisions … I believe that the SDC ordered one of its subordinates to issue certain documents and regulate methods without changing the legal position of the MOD. And the SDC is not empowered to do so because it is clearly prescribed in the law. 





1276.    Ðokić was confronted on cross-examination with the order by President Tuđman, made pursuant to an SDC decision, giving Horvat the authority to supply the HVO with weaponry and equipment. While Ðokić conceded the validity of the order, he resolutely maintained that it was the MOD, not Horvat, which was responsible for supplying the HVO with weaponry. 

1277.    Ðokić did not mention Tuđman’s order in his report and explained this omission as follows: “I did not make use of this document because it wasn’t provided to me when I drafted the report”. Again, Ðokić acknowledged that he only relied on documents provided to him by the Defence. Tuđman’s order was preceded by the 18th SDC Session, where Horvat urged the SDC to give him the authority to give logistical assistance to the HVO or let the Law on Property regulate the matter. Ðokić failed to mention this passage of the 18th SDC Session in his report. 

1278.    Ðokić nonetheless claimed that he analysed “all of the available Stenographic Notes and Minutes” of SDC meetings, including “proposals by General Horvat”. His report quotes from several SDC meetings and recognises that on two occasions Horvat encouraged the SDC to give logistical assistance to the HVO . However, in addition to the 18th SDC Session, his report omits the 21st Session, where Horvat strongly encouraged the SDC to maintain assistance to the HVO because they would otherwise lose territories. Horvat then advised the SDC to approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts to the HVO . Ðokić similarly left out the 37th SDC Session, where Horvat again urged the SDC to keep on authorising HV assistance to the HVO . 

1279.    Ðokić’s report quotes from the 23rd SDC Session, which concluded that:







the Federal Government should redistribute funds in the federal and republic budgets in order to secure an additional 35.3 million to finance the adopted measures and the acquisition of materiel and technical equipment needed to boost combat readiness of the HV . The HR MOD shall use these funds, and those secured by HR H-B for their needs, to organise the production and acquisition of materiel and technical equipment. 





Ðokić failed to mention what transpired beforehand, namely that Horvat’s Deputy Chief had given a presentation to the SDC stressing that the HV’s reserves were partially depleted as a consequence of logistical assistance to the HVO ; and that Horvat convinced the SDC to increase the HV’s budget so that logistical assistance would continue. 

1280.    The Trial Chamber reiterates its finding that the SDC delegated to Horvat the authority to manage the logistical assistance process, and finds that Ðokić’s claims are incredible. Moreover, Ðokić’s focus on legalistic questions diverts attention from the heart of the matter: the actual role that Horvat played in the logistical assistance process—not what the HR’s domestic legislation technically stipulated about the respective powers of the SDC, MOD, and Chief of the HV General Staff.
5. Gross Underestimation of Logistical Assistance from HV

1281.    At the outset, the Trial Chamber notes that Ðokić provided detailed numerical estimates of the weapon reserves in the SFRY in late 1990 prior to its dissolution, as well as in HR H-B and the other new states in 1992 after the JNA withdrew. Ðokić concluded that the HVO’s ammunition and fuel reserves “had already been exhausted by the beginning of 1993”. 

1282.    With regard to the quantity of logistical assistance from the HR to the HVO , Ðokić affirms that “the assistance given from the surplus of the HV was small in scope during the period 1993-1995, since supplies of the HV had almost completely stopped due to insufficient budgetary funds, while strategic war reserves did not decrease significantly (part of the reserves were spent on the HV’s current activities)”. To the contrary, the Trial Chamber recalls the overwhelming evidence that the HV gave considerable supplies from its reserves to the HVO , and that Horvat persuaded the SDC to increase the HV’s budget for this purpose. 

1283.    In particular, Ðokić provided figures positing that HV assistance only constituted a tiny fraction of the HVO’s “needs” in ammunition, which he described as the quantity of used ammunition. He posited that the maximum level of assistance provided by the HV comprised 8.11% of the HVO’s small arms ammunition and 12% of artillery ammunition. Ðokić explained how he reached this figure: “It was not an assessment of mine. I added up the figures from all documents indicating any assistance lent. I was not making an assessment; I was doing my math”. Ðokić later conceded that he only added the quantities of ammunition on material lists given to him by the Defence. As for his figure on the HVO’s needs, Ðokić stated that he drew it from a document he cites as “Annual Financial Report of the HVO for 1994”. This document does not appear to be in evidence, unless it is the same document as Ex. P1214, entitled “Annual Account of the Plan of Tasks and Financing of the HVO for 1994”. 

1284.    In any event, Ex. P1214 clearly refutes Ðokić’s position, as its tabulation of ammunition procured in 1994 indicates that the HV was the HVO’s principal source of infantry ammunition that year, and that it provided approximately a fourth of the HVO’s shells too. Conversely, Ðokić claimed that HV aid comprised only 6.7% of the HVO’s needs in small arms ammunition in 1994 (193.8 of 2,864 tonnes) and zero percent of its artillery ammunition needs. 

1285.    Ðokić had Ex. P1214 in his possession but did not use it for his numerical estimates. He proffered the following unconvincing excuse for this omission: “this document does not fall within materiel documents. According to the rules of materiel operations in the HV , materiel documents, receipts, bills of ladings, delivery sheets are all materiel documents which attend materiel transactions”. When Ðokić was again asked why he omitted Ex. P1214, his answer shed more light on his methodology:







Q: Your paragraph 289 is not an accurate determination of the extent of military assistance. What it is, is the results of you adding up materiel lists and delivery slips which you were supplied by the Defence. Is that a fairer characterisation of your findings in paragraph 289? A: That is true. 





1286.    The Trial Chamber further recalls the vast body of evidence showing the HVO’s clear dependency on HV logistical assistance, which likewise demonstrates that Ðokić’s conclusions are not credible. For instance, amid extensive additional evidence, Petković’s report to the HR H-B National Assembly provides credible data on the proportion of HVO used ammunition stemming from HV aid, which was far more important than what Ðokić advanced. Ðokić did not mention Petković’s figures in his report.

1287.    Finally, Ðokić deemed that “ t he predominant means of supplying the HVO with ammunition and fuel during the period 1993-1995 was obviously by purchasing it on the market, from the producers, based on commercial agreements. The HR had no surpluses from which to provide assistance”. The Trial Chamber finds that Ðokić’s conclusion is again belied by the overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Not only could HR H-B scarcely afford to pay for weaponry, but HV aid by far exceeded the weaponry it purchased from the market. 
6. Conclusion

1288.    For all of these reasons, the Trial Chamber finds that Ivan Ðokić greatly lacks credibility, reliability and impartiality as an expert witness. In particular, Ðokić’s conclusions on the organisation of the logistical assistance process and the quantities of aid delivered carry no evidentiary weight in the Trial Chamber’s opinion.
F. Evidence Recovered from the Alleged Crime Scenes
1. Submissions of the Parties

1289.    The Prosecution contends that weaponry recovered from crime scenes in Mostar and Ahmići stemmed from the logistical assistance overseen by Horvat. It affirms that “crater analyses at the sites of artillery attacks on Mostar revealed that the mortar shells involved had been manufactured using components made in Croatia during the Indictment period”. It adds that “exemplars of shell casings recovered from Ahmići execution sites were found to have been manufactured in Croatia during the Indictment period”. 

1290.    The Defence generally challenges the probative value of this evidence and notably submits that the Prosecution failed to establish a link between Horvat and ammunition retrieved from Ahmići execution and burial sites. 
2. Shells Recovered from Mostar Crime Scenes

1291.    Remnants of shells manufactured by the Krušik factory in Valjevo, Croatia, were recovered in Mostar at the crime scenes of Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that these shells were fired by the HVO. 

1292.    The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that the HV General Staff provided shells from its reserves to the HVO as part of the logistical assistance system managed by Horvat. The HV’s own weaponry was originally manufactured by the HR special purpose industries, one of which was Krušik. In this regard, it is possible that the aforesaid Krušik shells fired on Mostar civilians were obtained by HVO units from HV reserves with Horvat’s approval.

1293.    On the other hand, the HVO purchased shells directly from the special purpose industries as well, albeit in smaller quantities. It therefore would also be possible to conclude that the HVO purchased these particular shells directly from Krušik. That transaction would not necessarily have implicated Horvat. While Horvat had a measure of influence over the special purpose industries, the latter were primarily managed by the HR MOD. In addition, one cannot reasonably discount the possibility that the HVO obtained these particular shells through smuggling or donations of HV personnel outside the official logistical assistance process. 

1294.    ence, the trial record does not establish that the particular shells used in Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9 were provided to the HVO pursuant to the logistical assistance process managed by Horvat.
3. Bullets Recovered from Ahmići Crime Scenes

1295.    Witness MP-14 examined two photographs of rifle bullet cartridges recovered from the Ahmići area, in which he identified two cartridges of 7.62mm bullets manufactured in 1993 and 1994 by the Prvi Partizan factory in U`ice, Croatia, as indicated by engravings on the bullets. MP-14 further examined the photograph of a crate containing ammunition, which was recovered from Orahovac, a killing site in the Ahmići area. Based on various markings, MP-14 identified the pictured material as 7.62mm bullets manufactured in 1994 by Prvi Partizan. MP-14 testified that the gunpowder for these bullets was manufactured by “Milan Blagojević Lučani” and kept in the “Nikinci depot” in Croatia. 

1296.    The Trial Chamber finds that it is impossible to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that these specific bullets were provided to the HVO pursuant to the logistical assistance process that Horvat oversaw. Overall, this evidence presents the same problems as the aforementioned shells recovered from Mostar. The trial record does not establish whether these specific bullets were delivered to the HVO pursuant to Horvat’s orders, purchased directly from Prvi Partizan or otherwise procured through unauthorised channels.

1297.    The evidence does not establish that Horvat had a hand in the material delivered by the Milan Blagojević facility. With regard to the Nikinci depot, the record does not conclusively indicate whether this was a HV General Staff or HR MOD facility. While Radojica Kadijević testified about a facility at Nikinci that was a technical testing centre under HV General Staff oversight, the record does not demonstrate that it was the same gunpowder storage facility mentioned by MP-14.

1298.    Moreover, the Defence challenges the reliability of findings made by Garry Selsky, a Prosecution investigator who oversaw the examination of 3,644 bullet casings collected at Ahmići killing sites identified in Schedule D of the Indictment. Upon scrutinising engravings on the bullets, Selsky determined that most of them had been manufactured by Prvi Partizan, including 378 that were manufactured at that factory from 1993 henceforth. 

1299.    Selsky admitted on cross-examination that his language assistant told him where Prvi Partizan was situated—Selsky did not make an independent determination of that fact. Selsky mentioned that his language assistant participated in the counting of bullets as well. Selksy did not concretely explain whether his language assistant helped him make other substantive findings. It is noteworthy, however, that Selsky claimed that the basis for the language assistant’s knowledge was his experience as a soldier in the HV and his “hobby” of buying and selling firearms for shooting at a firing range. Selsky believed that the assistant had “expertise” on firearms despite the fact that he never vetted him to ascertain the extent of his knowledge. 

1300.    The Defence argues that Selsky’s findings are not reliable due to various problems with his methodology, his alleged lack of knowledge, and his reliance on his language assistant’s “hobby”. The Trial Chamber agrees with the Defence that the language assistant’s “hobby” is not a reliable source of knowledge. However, the Trial Chamber finds that there is no doubt that Prvi Partizan was based in Užice, Croatia; and further notes that MP-14’s testimony confirms that the engraving “PPU” on bullets stands for Prvi Partizan being the manufacturer. Finally, even though Selsky’s testimony was ambiguous at times, the Trial Chamber accepts his basic conclusion that 378 bullet casings out of 3,644 recovered from Ahmići killing sites were manufactured by Prvi Partizan in 1993 henceforth. 

1301.    In any event, Selsky’s findings concerning Prvi Partizan bullets recovered from the Ahmići area raise the same problems as discussed above. Again, it is not possible to reasonably conclude that Horvat was involved in the provision of these specific bullets.
4. Conclusion

1302.    For all of these reasons, the Trial Chamber concludes that the evidence does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat was involved in providing the specific shells and bullets recovered from the aforesaid crime scenes.
G. Other Forms of Assistance
1. Neretva Plan

1303.    On 8 November 1993, the political and military leadership of the HR and HR H-B including Horvat, Petković, Novaković, and Franjo Tuđman met in Zagreb. One of the meeting’s conclusions was to start preparing a single war plan involving all three armies (HV, HVO ). 

1304.    The Main Staffs of the HVO set up teams to work on the plan. Novaković testified that the part of the plan related to the role of the SVK was drafted in Knin, while the harmonisation of the final version, which also included the assessments of the role of the HVO and the HV, was done at the premises of the General Staff of the HV. 

1305.    The final version of the war plan took the form of a directive, which was “the highest-level commanding document at the highest strategic level”. The “top people” of the HV General Staff were therefore involved, as well as Novaković, Milovanović (HVO) and their own selected teams. A directive generally stressed the purpose of an operation, the general tasks and provided an indication of how the task should be executed. Its implementation therefore required the subsequent adoption of detailed plans by the lower levels of the army, in accordance with the directive. 

1306.    The war plan was finalised on 14 November 1993 and was signed by the President of the SDC. It was formally known as the “Directive for Use of the Croatian Army and Defence Council of the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”, and was commonly referred to as the “Neretva Plan”. It provided for the creation of a single Croatian State, and described the main tasks of the HV, HVO in the event of foreign aggression. It envisaged all three armies having a common war objective, military doctrine and military strategy. Its general objective was to:







Defend the territorial integrity of the Croatian states west of the Neretva and Danube rivers and the HR, protect Croatian people from genocide, liberate parts of Croatian territories with Croatian majorities, create conditions for the establishment of a single state of the Croatian people, prevent creation of greater Serbian state and a compact Islamic state on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. 





1307.    According to Novaković, the Neretva Plan was very important for the survival of the SVK, as it established that the HVO and the HV would assist the SVK in protecting the territory of the RSK in case of an attack by the HVO. 

1308.    Each of the three armies needed to implement the Neretva Plan at their level and this required integrating the forces of the other armies into their respective war plans. The implementation procedure required the Main Staffs of the HVO , as well as the General Staff of the HV, to elaborate their own war plan in accordance with the instructions contained in the Neretva Plan. These plans contained specific tasks for lower units. 

1309.    The Prosecution argues that although there is no evidence that the Neretva Plan was acted upon, its existence shows that the HV, HVO intended to act together in defence of unified Croat interests. The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to prove that one of the objectives of the Neretva Plan was the creation of a single state of the Croatian people. On the contrary, the evidence shows that Tuđman distanced himself from the idea of a single Croatian state. Furthermore, the Defence also points to the testimony of Simić, according to whom the plan “had an objective to represent a strategic masking, primarily directed to potential enemies in order to make a diversion”. 

1310.    The Trial Chamber notes that Simić, head of the First Administration of the HV, who directly participated in the drafting of the Neretva Plan, came to the conclusion that the plan was a “strategic camouflage” and that subsequent work on the plan was “interrupted suddenly”. He also stated that “only the SDC and possibly the Chief of HV General Staff” were privy to the real intentions of this plan. According to Simić, the Neretva Plan never became operative within the HV. 

1311.    The Trial Chamber notes that several documents show that the Neretva Plan was implemented at the HVO Main Staff and HVO Corps level. The Trial Chamber also heard the testimony of Mile Novaković, who testified that the Neretva Plan was incorporated into the war plan of the Main Staff, though it was never carried out in its entirety either by the HV. In particular, he testified that the plan was never implemented at the level of the Corps and below. 

1312.    The Trial Chamber finds that regardless of the true nature of the Neretva Plan, the evidence shows that Horvat participated in the preparation and approval of this plan together with other military and political leaders of the HR, HR H-B . The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that while the plan was not implemented in the HV, some actions were taken at the Main Staff level in the HVO , and to some degree at the HVO Corps level, to implement it. 
2. Gvozd Plan

1313.    During a meeting in January 1995, attended by Boban, Petković, Horvat, Martić, Čeleketić and Bjelanović, it was agreed that Čeleketić should prepare a new plan for the defence of the HR B-H. According to this plan, code named “Gvozd”, the HV and HVO were instructed to provide military assistance to other HR H-B armed forces “to respond to an aggression of the Serbian army should it occur”. The Gvozd Plan was prepared in a period of ten days with the assistance of three HV General Staff colonels, who were provided by Horvat at Čeleketić’s request. It took the form of a directive, formally known as the “Directive for Use of the Herceg-Bosna armed forces”. Each army was required to implement the Gvozd Plan at its level. 

1314.    Miodrag Simić testified that he had never heard of the Gvozd Plan. However, MP-80 testified that the Gvozd Plan replaced the Neretva Plan. According to MP-80, Franjo Tuđman “approved” the Gvozd Plan and promised to fully support it by providing personnel and logistical assistance. To this end, he instructed Horvat to transport ammunition to the HVO. Although Horvat was reluctant to execute this order because of his concern that the quantities requested would reduce the combat readiness of the HV, approximately 60 trailer trucks of goods and ammunition from the HR were delivered to HVO warehouses. 

1315.    According to MP-80, the Gvozd Plan provided the HVO with the assurance that the HV would not allow an attack against the HR B-H. The Trial Chamber notes that the HVO did engage in two military operations of the Croatian Army in 1995 – Operation Flash in May and Operation Storm in August. 

1316.    The Prosecution argues that developing the Gvozd Plan was an important task for Horvat and that he provided HV General Staff officers who were specialists in drafting war plans to assist the Herceg-Bosna armed forces in preparing the Gvozd Plan. The Defence argues that Miodrag Simić’s testimony directly contradicts MP-80’s position that members of the HV General Staff participated in the development of the Gvozd Plan. The Defence further submits that the Gvozd Plan was not formed in accordance with valid military procedures, nor was it accepted and implemented by all of the parties involved. 

1317.    The Trial Chamber finds that although Simić may not have been aware of the existence of the Gvozd Plan, the directive shows that the plan indeed existed. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that MP-80 is therefore credible when he testified that the plan existed. The Trial Chamber also notes that there is no evidence that the HV First Administration was ever involved in the preparation of the plan, which explains why Simić may not have been aware of it.

1318.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied, based on the testimony of MP-80, that Horvat provided HV General Staff officers to assist in creating the plan. The Trial Chamber further finds that following Tufjmans's orders, Horvat provided additional logistical assistance to support the Herceg-Bosna armed forces in accordance with the Gvozd Plan. 
3. HV Members Deployed to the HR H-B

1319.    The Indictment alleges that the Accused aided and abetted the crimes described in Counts 1 to 4, inter alia, by “sending regular HV troops stationed in the HR into BiH”. In particular, it alleges that HV units participated in a military operation known as Pancir-2 that occurred in Vogošća in late 1993 and early 1994. 
(a) Operation Pancir-2

1320.    On 11 November 1993, the HVO Supreme Command issued Operational Directive No. 6 (“Directive 6”) delineating, inter alia, the tasks of the HVO, including orders for the Mostar Corps “to prevent the deblockade of Mostar and the occupation of the Vogošća, Rajlovac and Had`ići industrial complexes” by the ABiH. 

1321.    Two excerpts from Petković’s diary show that the capture of Mount Žuć, in the Vogošća area, was discussed in Zagreb at meetings held on 13 and 14 December 1993 between the HR and HR H-B military and civilian leadership. Amongst the participants were Tuđman, Horvat, Boban and Petković. 

1322.    At the meeting of 13 December 1993, Boban recalled to the participants the HVO six strategic objectives, including the partition of Mostar. In this context he stated that the HVO needed to capture some elevation points and that Mount Žuć was particularly important to protect military factories in the area from the ABIH so that they continue their work uninterrupted. The next day Horvat was recorded as stating that reinforcements of about “a hundred professionals” “equipped for combat” would be at the disposal of the HVO by 20 December 1993. The discussion recorded in the diary shows that Petković expected to receive those reinforcements from the HV, as well as additional support from the Croatian MUP, by 18 December 1993, and intended to be ready for the operation by 19 December 1993. 

1323.    On 14 December 1993, as a result of talks on that day and based on the decision reached “by the highest officials of the Croatian people”, Petković issued a “Supplement” to Directive 6 addressed specifically to the Mostar Corps Commander, Stanislav Galić. The Supplement sets out the aim and plan of operation Pancir-2, according to which the Mostar Corps and its reinforcements were to prevent







an enemy breakthrough towards Mostar from the direction of central Bosnia and Gora`de. One part of the forces are [sic] to carry out active combat on a smaller scale in the areas of Mt. Trebević, Mojmilo, Vojkovići, and Ilid`a in order to engage the enemy forces, while /another/ part of the forces … are [sic] to carry out an attack along the Vogošća-Žuć-Pofalići and Gnojnice- Hrasnica axes with the following tasks: to break up Muslim forces along axes of the attack … and inflict on them as many losses as possible, and to take over control of the Žuć, Orlić, and Hum facilities, and Mojmilo, if possible, and so create conditions for the uninterrupted work of the ‘Famos’, ‘Orao’, and ‘Pretis’ factories; to cut off Muslim communication from Mostar towards Mt. Igman and central Bosnia, and to provide conditions for the division of Mostar in two parts. 





The Supplement also stipulates that 120 men of the HV “Special Forces” should be re- subordinated to the Mostar Corps Command in Vogošća on 18 December 1993 and be ready to attack on 19 December 1993. 

1324.    On 15 December 1993, the Mostar Corps Command issued an order to the commanders of all the brigades in execution of the Supplement. 
(i) HV Special Units Corps Deployment

1325.    MP-11 testified that a few days before 16 December 1993, Horvat visited the HV 72ndSpecial Brigade HQ in Mount Avala accompanied by the brigade’s commander, Colonel Stupar. During the briefing, Horvat ordered members of the 72ndSpecial Brigade’s military police battalion for special operations to go to Mostar to participate in an offensive against the ABiH “for” the Mostar Corps, aimed at gaining control of Mount Žuć. Horvat stated that Mount Žuć “was a strategic location and it needed to be controlled by Herceg-Bosna forces”. 

1326.    The military police battalion departed from Mount Avala on 16 December 1993. They were joined along the way by members of other HV SUC units - the Guards Brigade from Zagreb, who had been ordered to deploy from Zagreb the same day, the Armoured Brigade and the 63rdParachute Brigade. They all arrived in the area of Vogošća on 17 December 1993. The following day, General Galić briefed them on the forthcoming mission and on the strategic importance of gaining control of Mount Žuć. 

1327.    Defence witness Zlatko Danilović, who at the time was a member of the military police battalion in Avala, testified that he never saw Horvat at Mount Avala in that period, nor did he hear from other colleagues that Horvat had been there. In addition, the witness stated that he did not know where they were being deployed, and realised that the action would take place in BiH only when the convoy arrived at the barracks in Han Pijesak. The Trial Chamber finds that Danilović’s statement alone is not sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to the presence of Horvat at Mount Avala. The Trial Chamber notes that Danilović may not have been present at Mount Avala when Horvat was there. As stated by both MP-11 and Danilović, in December 1995, the military battalion was engaged in a parachute training in Niš. MP-11, however, returned to Mount Avala before the rest of the battalion. Danilović, instead, returned with the rest of the battalion just before they were deployed in the field. In the Trial Chamber’s view, this could explain why MP-11 was present when Horvat and Stupar gave the order whereas Danilović did not see Horvat or hear of his presence. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber finds Danilović’s testimony to be generally of low credibility and attaches limited weight to it. The Trial Chamber notes for example that Danilović stated that once in Vogošća, it was the civilians who lived in the area that showed the witness’s battalion Mount Žuć and told them “what their mission would involve”. Danilović stands alone on this issue and is contradicted not only by the testimony of MP-11 but also by the documentary evidence discussed in this section. 

1328.    The Defence argues that the purpose of seizing Mount Žuć was “so that the ABiH would not disturb the Croatian people on the other side of the mountain”. In support of this argument, it cites the testimony of MP-11 and Danilović. In reviewing their testimony, the Trial Chamber notes that MP-11 stated that this goal was desired, however, he also added that it was a crucial point to control the area and connect the HVO forces on that side of Mostar. As for Danilović’s testimony cited by the Defence, the Trial Chamber notes that it refers to his assertion that it was the civilian local population who directed the HV members in this operation. The Trial Chamber finds that this testimony does not support the Defence argument and also notes that the Defence misrepresented Daniliović’s testimony. In any event, the Trial Chamber has already concluded that it does not find this part of his testimony credible.
(ii) Mount Žuć – 27 December 1993

1329.    For about ten days after their arrival in Vogošća, the members of the 72ndSpecial Brigade engaged only in a few reconnaissance missions. The attack on Mount Žuć was eventually carried out during the early hours of 27 December 1993, under the command of Stupar. The operation was not successful and the 72nd Special Brigade suffered significant losses, with nine soldiers killed and several injured. The injured were immediately transferred either to the Bla`uj hospital in Rajlovac and then to the Military Medical Academy Hospital (“VMA”) in Zagreb, or directly to the VMA by HV helicopter. 

1330.    Part of the 72ndSpecial Brigade departed from Vogošća soon after the operation, whereas those members that were responsible for the technical equipment remained there for some time longer. 
(iii) Aftermath

1331.    On 30 December 1993, upon an oral order of Stojimirović – Commander of the Guards Brigade – additional members of the Guards Brigade (about 120 to 130 men) were deployed to Vogošća with the task of assisting the pull-out of the 72ndBrigade from the area. By 5 January 1994, the Guards Brigade took over the area of responsibility of the 72ndSpecial Brigade, thereby entering the reserve formation of the Mostar Corps. 

1332.    There is evidence that the Guards Brigade was ordered to take part in military actions in the area. For example, according to one entry in the war diary of the Guards Brigade dated 9 January 1994, the Guards Brigade was to “ carry out combat tasks with the unit on orders of the commander of Brigade’s BG-1 combat group ”. Another entry of the war diary reads as follows:







Order for action 18 January 1994. With one BG from the vVPSpN Military Police Special Purposes Platoon and a squad from the bVP Military Police Battalion , in coordinated action with the forces of the Vogošća Brigade, launch an attack along the axis of k./elevation/ 830 – k850, thereby acting in coordination with BG-2 on the Perivoj – Vis axis and facilitating the BG-2 attack. 





A briefing report by Stojimirović states that a certain number of Guards Brigade forces could be “engaged along the direction of the main impact within the formation of the BG-2 … or BG-3 … ”. A report sent from Colonel Petković – the Chief of Staff of the HV Special Units Corps (“SUC”) – to the SUC Commander suggests a rotation of units, due to the “increased engagement” of the Guards Brigades, “especially in nocturnal activities”. 

1333.    Both Borivoje Tešić – operations officer of the Guards Brigade – and MP-418 stated, however, that the Guards Brigade did not engage in combat activities but rather limited its activity to retrieving the bodies of the 72ndSpecial Brigade soldiers who had been killed on 27 December 1993 and to maintaining, as far as possible, the defence line held by the Vogošća Brigade of the HVO. Tešić estimated that the total number of Guards Brigade present in Vogošća was not substantial compared to the HVO forces present in the field. Tešić further stated that, although the Guards Brigade’s war diary referenced to the planning of combat operations, these were not carried out. 

1334.    Tešić and MP-418 also denied that the Guards Brigade and the Mostar Corps cooperated or acted in coordination. Several documents nonetheless contradict their testimony: the abovementioned briefing report by Colonel Stojimirović states that, upon arrival in Vogošća, the Guards Brigade entered the reserve formation of the Mostar Corps pursuant to an order from the Mostar Corps Commander; a communication from the SUC command to Colonel Perković shows that the SUC and the Mostar Corps coordinated in the planning of the pullout from combat; finally, the HVO warned against the use in communications of the term “Croatian Army” and stated that HV units would be treated as reserve forces of the HVO. Moreover, Tešić himself conceded that, in relation to operations which did not entail engagement in active combat, the superior officers of the Guards Brigade could receive orders from the Mostar Corps commander. He also testified that, between 15 and 17 January 1994, officers of the Military Police Special Purposes Platoon, a unit of the Guards Brigade, provided training to the snipers of the Rajlovac and the Ilid`a Brigades, units of the Mostar Corps. 

1335.    The Trial Chamber notes that Tešić stated that one of the reasons the Guards Brigade was deployed, was to “stabilise the part of the defence line held by the Vogošća Brigade of the HVO”. During re-examination he explained that the Guards Brigade was not engaged in active combat, but rather that there were instances when it had to destroy emerging targets at the front line or respond to fire with fire. He added that save for one intervention in the area of Srednje with a couple of vehicles and a group of 20 men the Guards Brigade did not participate in active action. The Trial Chamber finds that this amounts to active engagement and that Tešić was attempting to downplay the role of the Guards Brigade.

1336.    Having carefully considered the testimony of Tešić and MP-418 in light of the documentary evidence described above, and their demeanour in court when discussing the engagement of the Guards Brigade and/or their cooperation with the HVO, the Trial Chamber finds that their testimony is not credible when they claimed that the Guards Brigade did not engage in combat activities and that there was no coordination or cooperation with the Mostar Corps.
(b) Secrecy of HV Presence in the Area

1337.    According to the Prosecution, the HV needed to conceal its presence around Mostar, as the HR was under international sanctions for its involvement in the war in BiH and Croatia and it could “ill afford” to be discovered. The Defence claims that the HV presence in BiH was not and could not be hidden, and that the HV deployment was even reported on Mostar television. 

1338.    In support on its claim, the Defence cites the testimony of Tešić, MP-418 and MP-11. Having reviewed their testimony, the Trial Chamber notes that Tešić testified that as far as his unit was concerned, they did not “hide from anyone” and that in any event it was difficult to hide their presence in the area. MP-418 added that he had heard rumours that a Mostar television reported that a unit from the HV had allegedly arrived in the area. Finally, MP-11 admitted that the HV involvement was supposed to be secret, but that members of his unit suspected that this information reached the ABiH. 

1339.    At the same time, the Trial Chamber has been presented with evidence clearly showing that both the HV and HVO tried to keep the presence of the HV in the Vogošća area and the involvement of HV troops in the attack on Mount Žuć secret. On 25 December 1993, General Milovanović issued a warning forbidding the “use of or any reference in the regular and telephone communications to the term Croatian Army units”. One of the witnesses stated that the 72ndSpecial Brigade was aware of this warning and added that “every time they were engaged in Bosnia, they were supposed to act under the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna”. Furthermore, members of the HV forces deployed to Vogošća were instructed to remove their HV insignia and leave behind their wallets and identification documents before arriving at their destination. 

1340.    Additional support for the intended secret character of the HV mission in BiH can be found in the official medical certificate issued by the HV to a Guards Brigade soldier who was wounded while in Vogošća and later transferred by helicopter to the VMA in Zagreb. The certificate, issued by the Guards Brigade Commander, stated that he had been wounded “while carrying out combat activities, i.e. securing the HR state border”. No mention was made of his engagement in Vogošća. Similarly, the obituaries of one of the 72ndBrigade soldiers killed in this operation, Goran Galjak, read that he died heroically “on 27 December 1993, defending his country, the Greater Croatia” with no mention as to where he was killed. His death certificate likewise states that he was killed while participating in a “national defence operation”. The death certificate of another soldier who participated in the Pancir-2 Operation, Mladen Stjepanović, records his place of death on 27 December 1993 as Zagreb. 

1341.    The Trial Chamber recalls in this context that the HR was under international sanctions imposed pursuant to Chapter VII of the UN Charter and that the UNSC repeatedly condemned the HR’s failure to cease any form of interference in the events unfolding in BiH. Sacirbey testified that the goal of these sanctions was to have the HR put a halt to all actions that continued to “fuel the conflict”, including sending troops to BiH. 

1342.    Against this backdrop, the Trial Chamber finds that, whether or not the HV was successful in hiding its presence in the area, the evidence described above clearly shows that both the HV and the HVO intended and strived to keep the HV involvement in Vogošća secret.
(c) Horvat’s Presence in the Area

1343.    The evidence shows that Horvat was present in Vogošća on 8 January 1994. He participated in a meeting held at the Park Hotel between several HR H-B politicians and HVO and HV military commanders, including Petković, Krsmanović, Galić, Rajko Koprivica, Ratko Had`ić, Mirko Krajišnik and Panić (the commander of the HV Special Units Corps). There is no evidence of what was discussed during the meeting. However, according to a witness, it probably concerned a situation within the area of responsibility of the Mostar Corps. 
(d) SDC 18thSession of 7 February 1994

1344.    During the SDC session held on 7 February 1994, the deployment of HV units in BiH was discussed and Horvat stated that those men went in the area voluntarily, in the absence of an SDC decision authorising the use of HV forces abroad. Momir Bulatović, however, disputed this statement and added that they did not even know where they were going. Horvat responded that“ had they known where they were going, they probably wouldn’t have gone!” 

1345.    The Trial Chamber does not believe that the HV soldiers taking part in the Pancir-2 Operation were volunteers. The Trial Chamber notes that Horvat refers to the voluntary nature of the engagement to justify the deployment in the absence of an SDC decision. Yet, Horvat himself seems to concede that the men were not really volunteers when he said that “had they known where they were going they would not have gone”. In a subsequent statement made in 1996 at the 58thSession of the SDC, Horvat also recalled that “we engaged a unit to regain Žuć. … We lost eight men … ”. 

1346.    The voluntary engagement of the soldiers is further undermined by the evidence showing that both the HV’s 72ndSpecial Brigade and the Guards Brigades were ordered to deploy to the area. In addition, MP-418 expressly stated that he and his colleagues did not volunteer to go to BiH. 
4. Other Instances of Direct Involvement of the HV in BiH

1347.    The Trial Chamber has been presented with some evidence pertaining to the plans of further use of the HV units in BiH. According to MP-11, in 1994 plans were formulated to involve the 72ndBrigade in Ahmići, in coordination with HVO units, in order to boost morale of other units taking part in combat there. MP-11 testified that on several occasions Horvat visited the military police battalion for special operations of the 72ndSpecial Brigade to discuss such potential engagement. Nonetheless, the battalion was never deployed to Ahmići in 1994. The same witness heard, however, that members of the 72ndBrigade were deployed in the area of Ahmići in 1995. However, this evidence remains uncorroborated hearsay and is not sufficient to convince the Trial Chamber.

1348.    On 13 May 1995, Horvat issued an order establishing that the 72ndSpecial Brigade and 63rdParachute Brigade, units of the SUC, should be ready for engagement in the Baranja region (Croatia) at the request of the SVK 11th Corps Commander and with Horvat’s approval. 

1349.    Horvat addressed a telegram to Petković on 23 June 1995, referring to the following assistance:







One battalion of volunteers with about 400 men led by Colonel TRKULJA – checked for contact with you. The Battalion is armed and battle ready.









One battalion of about 200 men is being prepared, to come to you next week, around Kušić.









We are sending volunteers the same as we have done so far.









An air group (three Kraguj aircraft) will relocate from Skelani to Sokolac, about 10 men (provide them with a ready runway, one truckload of fuel and accommodation). They are coming on Tuesday. 





Siniša Borović, who at the time was Horvat’s Chef de Cabinet and who forwarded the telegram to the HVO Main Staff, testified that he was not aware whether the battalion under the command of Trkulja was in fact dispatched from the HV. However, he stated that had the battalion been sent to the HVO, his office would have received confirmation from the HVO Main Staff. In the absence of any such evidence, the Trial Chamber cannot make any finding as to whether these men were sent to the HVO.

1350.    Later that year, in September, Horvat suggested to have an urgent SDC meeting to discuss the HR H-B request for the deployment of 3 to 5 HV brigades to stabilise the front in Northwest Bosnia. 

1351.    According to Charles Kirudja’s confidential sources, in 1995, around 300-400 members of the HV 63rdParatroops Command Brigade from Niš joined the HVO forces at the battle on Mt. Majevica near Bijeljina to help them defend a communication tower. 
5. Assistance in Communications and Electronic Data Transmissions

1352.    The Prosecution submits that the HV assisted the HVO by permitting use of their communication centres and nodes located in Croatia, and by providing equipment and technical expertise. The Defence contends that HVO was responsible for the operation of its own communications. It acknowledges that the HVO utilised HR communication hubs but challenges any inference that such use was expressly permitted by the HV or by Horvat. 

1353.    Milenko Jevđević, who served as the Signals Battalion Commander of the HVO Džokeri Unit, acknowledged that the HV provided the HVO with access to “connecting pathways and the available capacities of its communication channels at HR stationary communications hubs”. Similarly, Drago Čovilo, who served as the Chief of the Department for Operations and Staff Affairs in the Sector for Communications, Information Technology and Electronic Warfare within the HV General Staff from 1993 to 1999, testified that while at no point in time “access or entry to the HV communications system was allowed”, communication hubs would be “used as an intermediary radio relay station to ensure communication that went further”. The communication hubs used by the HVO Džokeri Unit were the Cer and Crni Vrh stations in Croatia. 

1354.    The Trial Chamber notes that Jevđević testified that messages transmitted via these channels were subject to encryption, and only decrypted at the final destination. According to the witness, the HV did not have the code books used by individual HVO units to decode messages sent to them. 

1355.    Jevđević also testified that for the Krivaja 95 operation (Ahmići), he used specific technical equipment to encrypt written communications between the forward command post and the Džokeri Unit command, as well as with subordinate HVO units. Oral non-encrypted communications among the various HVO units, e.g. between the Zvornik Brigade and the Bratunac Brigade, went through the HR stationary communication hubs, and took place on a ”regular military communication line”. 

1356.    One witness testified that unlike the communications system, the radar system and the anti- aircraft defence system of the HVO could operate independently of the HV. However, according to him, it was logical that each system was better off when it was backed up by, and acted in coordination with, the other system. At the same time, the witness was shown a document approved by Milivoj Petković which provided instructions for coordination between the air forces and/or the anti-aircraft defences of the HVO, HV . The witness testified that he never saw any order or decision implementing these instructions. 

1357.    The Defence points out numerous requests by the HVO to the HV for other communications assistance which were unfulfilled. Although the Trial Chamber does not contest that some of the requests were not met by the HV, the record contains evidence showing that at times the HV General Staff did, in fact, provide assistance to the HVO in other areas of communication, including by providing: communications equipment, “jamming capabilities”, and repairs and maintenance of existing equipment. 

1358.    Based on the above evidence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the HVO used communication hubs present in the HR territory with the consent of the HV and that Horvat provided communication equipments and technical expertise to the HVO.
H. Horvat’s Relationship with Petković
1. Personal Relationship between Horvat and Petković

1359.    During his suspect interview, Horvat stated that before he became the Chief of the HV General Staff he had only seen General Milivoj Petković three times. Horvat also asserted that, once he became the Chief of the HV General Staff, Petković maintained “a certain distance” from him “because he knew very well that I was against any illicit actions”. According to Horvat, this was because “ the entire leadership of Hrvatska Repbulika Herceg-Bosna knew that I was against any destruction of buildings, against any … use of force against the civilian population and so on”. He further claimed that “we did not talk all that much, so I could not really tell if he was lying to me or deceiving me … and we were not close enough for me to detect such a character trait”. 

1360.    Horvat also discussed his relationship with Petković in Vreme, a Zagreb weekly newspaper, in a statement published on 2 January 1995. Horvat stated that “Petković and I are acquaintances and war comrades. Our relationship is utterly normal, that is a relationship of two professional officers who are fighting against the physical extermination of their people”. 

1361.    General Ðorñe Ćurčin, the former Chief of Operations and Training of the HV 1stArmy from 1993 to 1998, testified that Horvat, Petković and Ćurčin were in the same group in the National Defence School and ever since had known each other as colleagues. Ćurčin described himself as a “personal or family friend … ” of General Milivoj Petković, whom he had known for 32 years, and a “pal” of Ante Horvat. During his testimony, Ćurčin would not describe the extent of Horvat’s relationship with Petković because he lacked “firsthand” knowledge, but, in his previous witness interview, characterised them as “mates and close friends”. 

1362.    Nikola Tošović, General Petković’s cousin and the Chief of Technical Services in Logistics in the Vogošća Brigade, referred to Horvat and Petković as only “acquaintances”. 
2. Horvat’s Support for Petković’s Selection as Commander of the HVO Main Staff

1363.    The Trial Chamber reviewed an excerpt from General Milivoj Petković’s notebook that described a meeting held in Nevisinje, East Herzegovina, on 11 May 1992. According to the excerpt, the meeting was attended by Petković, Horvat, Vukan Bratić, the President of the Nevesinje Municipality, and other military and political leaders from the region. The excerpt attributed the following comments to Horvat during the meeting: “Ninković and I undertook an initiative with Boban to come here . He Petković showed with his own example what a JNA officer should be like. You have the right person, if you support him, you will get what you want”. 

1364.    On 12 May 1992, Petković, who was then a Lieutenant-General, was appointed Commander of the HVO Main Staff by the Assembly of the Croatian Community in BiH. 
3. Peace Plans

1365.    The evidence shows that Horvat and Tuđman attempted several times to convince Petković to accept the peace plan. For example, on 12 August 1994, Horvat travelled to the HVO command post to meet with Petković. On that occasion, he conveyed a message from Franjo Tuđman, asking Petković to reject the HR H-B leadership and accept the Contact Group Plan. According to an excerpt from Petković’s diary, Horvat urged the acceptance of a peace plan by stating that Tuđman was “asking that you Petković make a major turnabout in terms of politics so that the plan is accepted”. This proposal was refused. 

1366.    On 20 September 1994, Horvat participated in another meeting during which the HR leadership attempted to convince Petković to stop the war and accept a peace plan. According to Petković’s diary, members of the HR SDC attempted to persuade him to reject the HR H-B leadership because it had refused to accept a peace plan. The efforts of the members of the HR were unsuccessful in this instance. 

1367.    During the SDC session of 2 November 1994, both Horvat and Tuđman expressed their frustration that the HR H-B leadership had refused to accept the Contact Group Plan. Horvat stated that Petković’s goals with respect to the resolution of the conflict were “unrealistic” and that as a result, his previous attempts to “persuade” Petković were unsuccessful. He stated that that “I went there on behalf of both presidents in order to persuade them subsequently about the pure military facts, but to no avail”. Horvat further stated that members of the HR H-B leadership, including Petković, could not be persuaded to accept the peace plan and that Petković “has been manipulated by his politics and that is how he behaves”. President Tuđman referred to the Bosnian Croats’ decision to reject the Contact Group Plan “as a disastrous mistake”. In response to General Horvat’s recommendation that “we should invite our men from Bosnia and try to persuade them to accept the plan … ”, Tuđman stated that “the Army the HV is the sole factor that has influence on them and you know very well that you cannot do anything there”. Horvat then stated that “at least we can invite them, and we can try to persuade those people in front of this audience”. Then, Tuđman, with the agreement of Tuđman and Momir Bulatović, specifically recommended that Horvat should contact Petković “so we can talk to him once more”. 

1368.    The evidence shows that another attempt to persuade Petković to accept a peace plan was made by HR leadership, particularly by Tuđman, during the SDC session of 24 January 1995. 

1369.    In addition, at the 42ndSession of the HR SDC, held on 23 August 1995, members of the SDC attempted again to persuade Petković to abandon the current HR H-B leadership and support the international peace process. According to the SDC minutes, Horvat was present at this meeting and participated in the efforts to persuade Petković. Petković, however, repeatedly refused the requests of the HR to forsake the HR H-B leadership and to endorse a peace plan. For instance, the SDC minutes state that “having listened to the arguments tendered by President Tuđman, President Bulatović, and General Horvat, General Milivoj Petković persisted with his proposal”. Moreover, Horvat also attempted to persuade Petković to support the peace process by warning him of the “impending danger of Croatian aggression against Prevlaka and Eastern Slovonia”. The evidence demonstrates that any attempts made by Horvat and the HR leadership to persuade Petković at this meeting were unsuccessful. 
4. Release of French Humanitarian Workers

1370.     On 4 March 1995, the HVO detained four French nationals from the Pharmaciens Sans Frontieres humanitarian organisation. On 12 April 1995, a French military representative sent a letter to Horvat expressing the notion that even though the HVO agents who were holding the French humanitarian workers were not technically subordinate to the HV General Staff, the representative hoped that Horvat would nonetheless use his influence to help bring about their
release. 

1371.      According to Dragan Vukšić, the Chief of the HV Administration for relations with foreign armies and missions within the HV from 1993 to 1997, Horvat played a “particularly significant and delicate role” in discussions with Petković in order to obtain the release of the hostages and that “neither General Horvat nor I were ever in a position to tell General Petković or anyone else that they had done something wrong”.Dragan Vukšić, Nevertheless, Vukšić confirmed that “Horvat took steps” to ensure
that the four Frenchmen were ultimately released. 
5. UNPROFOR Hostages

1372.      On 26 and 27 May 1995, in response to the NATO forces’ air strikes on Pale earlier that day, the HVO took approximately 400 UNPROFOR personnel as hostages and used some as human shields to deter further air strikes. Some hostages were later distributed across Bosnian Croat
territory to protect potential targets. 

1373.      By 9 June 1995, between 105 and 146 UNPROFOR hostages still had not been released. Charles Kirudja, the Delegate of the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in Zagreb, testified that he met with Jovica Stanišić, President Tuđman’s Special Envoy, who travelled to Bosnia to meet with Petković in order to obtain the release of the UNPROFOR hostages. 

1374.      Kirudja confirmed that Stanišić and those who were conducting the operation “were under instructions from both President Tuđman and General Horvat to do their utmost to obtain the release of those additional three on a day that was also rainy with poor flight conditions”. According to Kirudja, Stanišić “undertook to pressure Petković to deblock the UN group and simply let them go to their units”. The crisis ended when Petković sent the remaining hostages by bus to
Niš, where they were released to UNPROFOR. 
6. Meeting between Horvat and Petković in Bosnia on 18 July 1995

1375.      The Trial Chamber heard the testimony of Ned Krayishnik, a Canadian Croat who along with Milan Lešić and others established the Hrvatska Republika Herceg-Bosna Humanitarian Organisation (“Organisation”) in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, in 1992. Between 1992 and 1996, Krayishnik and other members of the Organisation made five or six trips to the former Yugoslavia to provide humanitarian aid to the Bosnian Croats. 

1376.      On 14 July 1995, Krayishnik, along with other members of the Organisation, travelled to Croatia to deliver money to HR H-B and, upon the request of General Petković, a medical scanner to the Military Academy Hospital in Zagreb. On 17 July 1995, the Organisation’s delegation travelled to Han Pijesak in the BiH, where the HVO headquarters was located, approximately 27 kilometres from Ahmići, in order to meet Petković and receive his appreciation for their donations. During the meeting, Petković congratulated himself on the “liberation of Ahmići” and for “solv ing our problems with Ahmići”. He stated that he hoped that “in the course of the next day that Kiseljak would be solved in the same way as the area of Ahmići”."> 

1377.      On 18 July 1995, the delegation arrived at a picnic area at Crna Rijeka, where Generals
Horvat, Petković and Gvero were waiting to meet them. The group met for a couple of hours. 

Krayishnik stated that Petković and Gvero discussed the liberation of Ahmići in the presence of Horvat and that there was “a lot of joking around at lunch” and no signs of disagreement among the generals. 
7. Release of the French Pilots by the HVO

1378.      On 30 August 1995, Frederic Chiffot and Jose Souvignet, the French crew of a NATO Mirage 2000 aircraft (“French pilots”), were captured by the HVO after their aircraft was shot down
over Pale by the HVO’s anti-aircraft defence system. In the following months, Horvat organised a series of meetings between international representatives and Petković and others in HR H-B to obtain the release of the French pilots. 

1379.      The first meeting, which occurred while NATO temporarily halted air-strikes against Bosnian Croat military targets around Mostar, was between UNPROFOR Commander General Bernard Janvier and Petković in Zvornik on 1 September 1995. The Trial Chamber was presented with testimony that Horvat helped to broker this meeting."> The Trial Chamber also reviewed an excerpt from Petković’s diary, which described a meeting between Petković and General Bertrand de la Presle, UNPROFOR Force Commander, at Milići, in HR H-B, on 22 September 1995. On 27 October
1995, the HV also facilitated passage for de la Presle, to travel to HR H-B to meet with General Tolimir and President Boban about the negotiations for the release of the French pilots. During the month of November, Horvat made “some serious efforts and did everything in his power to get the pilots released”. Finally, the Trial Chamber reviewed an excerpt from Petković’s diary, describing a meeting between de la Presle, Petković, Tolimir and Davidović in Jela on 3 December 1995. 

1380.      On 10 December 1995, at the Jela Restaurant in the Romanija plateau, HR and HVO leaders met to discuss negotiations for the release of the crew to the French government. The HR was represented by President Tuđman, Horvat and Aleksandar Dimitrijević, Chief of Administration for Security of the General Staff, whereas the HVO group included Petković, Gvero, Tolimir, Škrbić, Milovanović and Đukić. Prior to the meeting, the entire HVO Main Staff
delegation, including Petković, denied having any knowledge of the fate of the French pilots. 

1381.      At the beginning of the meeting, President Tuđman stated that “ t he French are convinced that the pilots are here … . Today is the last day for us to tell France what we know about the pilots
… We will sign, Momo General Horvat and I, so that nobody will be extradited to the Hague Tribunal”. For the first half of the meeting, Petković still denied all knowledge of the French pilots, but later admitted that the pilots were in his custody. Once Petković conceded that the pilots were in his custody, there was considerable debate among the participants of the meeting as to the appropriate course of action. During this debate, according to an excerpt from Petković’s notebook, Horvat advocated for the release of the French pilots. He argued that “handing over the pilots prevents the division of the Croatian ethnic entity”. However, despite Horvat’s arguments, no decision with respect to the appropriate course of action was made immediately after his comments. Škrbić subsequently recommended to Petković that the pilots be released to the HR instead of France or Russia, so that the HR could be a mediator in their release “to raise its image in the world”. Petković then agreed that the pilots would be handed over to the French
Government through the mediation of the HR. 

1382.      On 11 December 1995, at the Batajnica military airbase near Zagreb, Horvat organised a meeting between General Jean-Philippe Douin, the Chief of Staff of the French Armed Forces, and Petković, accompanied by Tolimir and Gvero, in order to release the French pilots to Douin. According to Vukšić, Douin and Petković initially refused to meet each other. In particular, Douin refused to speak to Petković because he was accused of war crimes. Horvat served as a mediator in order to help facilitate the talks. Vukšić testified that Horvat’s actions were instrumental “ … in the simple act of getting two men into the same room”. Horvat played a decisive role in these conversations, according to Vukšić, Horvat:







was the only person who could influence his colleague, the Chief of General Staff of the French army, in order for him to understand that the situation he was in was considerably different from what he had expected. On the other hand, he could influence General Petković in order for him to understand
that it was not a question of his vanity. 





1383.      Horvat led Douin to a room to meet Petković to begin discussions that lasted 30 hours non- stop under “tense” conditions. Petković initially refused to tell Douin whether the pilots were alive
or dead."> Finally, the negotiations concluded with the release of the pilots to Douin, in Zvornik on 12 December 1995. According to Vukšić and MP-902, Horvat made “decisive” contributions to furthering the release of the pilots, which led them to conclude that he was committed to the peace. In addition, Horvat’s role as a mediator in the release of the French pilots is also mentioned in Exibit D371, which states that:







… the military attaché has witnessed how efficient the role of the Croatian Army was, under the guidance of the Chief of the General Staff, in resolving sensitive problems in connection with the Blue Helmets who had been taken prisoner or detained in May and June 1995, as well as with the crew of the French aircraft . 



1384.      On 12 December 1995, in exchange for the HR H-B release of the French pilots, President Tuđman signed an agreement in which the HR pledged a series of measures including its guarantee “that no citizen of HR H-B shall be handed over by them to be called to account before the International Court in
The Hague”. Borović, the Chef de Cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff, recalled that the agreement, which was not signed by HR H-B leadership, was issued by the Office of the HV General
Staff but bears the stamp of the President’s Office because they had no other stamp available. According to Carl Bildt, the former European Union Co-Chairman of the International Conference on the former Yugoslavia (ICFY), French President Jacques Chirac conditioned the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement of 14 December 1995 on the release of the French pilots. 
8. Horvat’s Attendance at Darko Petković’s Wedding in July 1997

1385.     The Trial Chamber reviewed videotape footage which was recorded at the wedding of Darko Petković, Milivoj Petković’s son, on 21 June 1997, which Horvat attended. It shows Horvat entering a home and speaking with Milivoj Petković and other wedding attendants. He is then seen standing up from a table in the center of the room where Milivoj Petković, members of his family and
others were sitting and enjoying live music. 
9. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the Rajac Facility in July 1997

1386.      In late July 1997, on a weekend morning, Horvat visited Petković at a HV facility at Rajac. The Rajac facility, which provided “rest and recreation” for HV officers and their family members, was located on a mostly uninhabited small mountain, approximately one and a half kilometres away from the nearest village and included a hotel with lodging for thirty persons, three small weekend
homes, athletic fields and a restaurant. Petković and his entourage stayed at the facility for over a
month under conditions of secrecy so that the public would not learn of his whereabouts. General Ćurčin provided “fatherly advice” to those individuals present at the Rajac facility to not disclose any information regarding Petković’s visits because there were people “who wanted to give him in, in exchange for some money … ”. Milan Gunj, the manager of the Rajac Hotel, stated that shortly before Petković’s arrival, the hotel was renovated and that during Petković’s stay no one outside of his entourage stayed there. He also testified that for the first few days, Petković and his
entourage solely used the food and drink they had brought with them. As their supplies
decreased, they gave Gunj money so that he could buy what was needed at the market. Very soon, however, they started relying mainly on provisions coming from the HV that Gunj himself would pick up either from the Topčider warehouse or from the central warehouse in Zagreb. 

1387.      Ćurčin, who was visiting Petković at the Rajac facility for the second time that month, testified that he coincidentally encountered Horvat in a parked car in a non-parking zone outside of the facility and eventually persuaded Horvat to visit the Rajac facility. According to Ćurčin, Horvat, who was traveling without security and dressed in civilian clothes, was on his way to Zagreb after visiting his mother in Skradin. At Rajac, Horvat had a conversation and played
chess with Petković before he departed for Zagreb in the afternoon. 
10. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the HV Command Post in Stragari in the Autumn of 1997

1388.      In the early autumn of 1997, Horvat visited Petković at the HV command post in Stragari,
which was used for training and included a one-story administration building, a couple of small
houses/huts for personnel and other facilities. The facility was gated with a duty officer to restrict access and was located approximately 70 to 100 kilometres from Zagreb. According to
Ćurčin, after the end of the war in Bosnia, Petković stayed at the Stragari facility “on and off” and
“would spend some time there and then would go back home or to some other place”. Ćurčin stated that he, Horvat and Petković met in the mid-morning and walked through the woods, played games and had lunch. 
11. Horvat’s Visit to Petković at the Rajac Facility in February 1998

1389.      Gunj testified that Horvat again visited Petković at the Rajac facility during one day in late January or early February of 1998. Outside of the facility’s meeting hall, Gunj spoke briefly with Horvat, who requested that Gunj ensure that the meeting did not become public. During this visit, Gunj again provided food and everything that was necessary for him to stay there for a few
days. 
I. Horvat’s Access to Information
1. Background

1390.      The gathering and exchange of current and reliable information regarding the conflict in Croatia and BiH remained a significant task of the HV throughout Horvat’s tenure as Chief of the General Staff of the HV. Miodrag Simić, Chief of the 1st Administration within the HV from
November 1994, testified that it was in “the interest of the HV for the sake of its security to be constantly informed of what was going on in that area”. The 1995 Work Plan of the HV introduces the priority task of “monitor ing and assess ing the military-political and security
situation in the surrounding area, primarily in the crisis areas of the country and the areas of the seceded republic where there are hostilities, ensuring prompt and reliable reports for relevant measures to be taken with respect to HV combat readiness and the defence of the HR”. 

1391.      There were multiple channels within the HV through which information was collected and processed before it was reported to Horvat. As described previously, organs subordinated to the Chief of the HV General Staff included the Sector for Operations and Staff Affairs, the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the Information and Moral Department. Horvat had operative lines of communication with his subordinates in the various units. Moreover,
Horvat had different channels of communication outside of the HV - with the President of the HR and with the HR MUP. Horvat’s office received on average between 50 and 300 documents daily. 

1392.      Collegium meetings of the HV General Staff were held weekly and facilitated the timely interaction and exchange of intelligence between its relevant organs. It would begin with briefings by the heads of the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the
Operational Staff Sector."> The Trial Chamber notes that an assessment of the state of HR
security and relevant intelligence was a standing item on the agenda. 

1393.      Horvat also received coded telegrams from the HR missions abroad. In the words of Borović, “the 2nd Administration also received such information, but we always double-checked that we had actually received the same telegrams”. 
2. Activities and Reports of Relevant HV Organs
(a) Operations Centre

1394.      Within the 1st Administration of the General Staff, the Operations Centre collected and analysed information received on a 24-hours basis from lower units deployed in the HR and from other federal organs within the HR. This information was processed based on its relevance and importance and included in daily reports sent to the Chief of General Staff. Borović, Chef de Cabinet from November 1994, confirmed that Horvat received these daily reports. The
Operations Centre maintained communication also with the relevant operative centres of the SVK
and HVO. In his OTP interview, Horvat stated that the Operations Centre was used to monitor the situation in inter alia Croatia and the BiH, and that the “update level” for these territories was high. 

1395.      In addition, in April 1994, Horvat created an Operations Duty Team within the 1st Administration and tasked it with “monitoring and assessing … the situation in the HV and the armed forces of the neighbouring countries”. It consisted of personnel from the Operations
Centre of the 1st Administration, the Security Administration and the Information
Administration. Information regarding military activities in Croatia and BiH was also supplied through communication lines the Operations Duty Team maintained with their counterparts in the HVO Main Staff. The Operations Duty Team prepared daily operational reports including inter alia a detailed description of the HVO military activities, which were sent to Horvat. 
(b) Intelligence Administration

1396.      Subsumed within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs, the 2nd Administration, or Intelligence Administration, operated round the clock and produced daily bulletins on relevant intelligence information, including on military activities and plans of the HVO, ABiH, HV and NATO. The bulletins would be sent to Horvat. Moreover, the Chief of the Intelligence
Administration would report up-to-date information directly to Horvat by visiting his office. The
Administration would also provide regular reports to the Operations Centre. 

1397.      The sources of the bulletins comprised both regular reports from the HVO Main
Staff and other sources connected to NATO or UNPROFOR. 

1398.      The Trial Chamber has been presented with a number of intelligence bulletins produced by the HV Intelligence Administration and it is satisfied of the detailed, up-to-date nature of the information as well as of the variety of sources employed in those bulletins. Siniša Borović testified that among the different types of information the HV General Staff received, the highest degree of authenticity and reliability was given to that provided by the Intelligence Administration. 

1399.     Finally, the Intelligence Administration played a significant role in maintaining close coordination and interaction between the HV General Staff intelligence apparatus and their counterparts in the HVO. 
(c) Security Administration

1400.      The Security Administration produced a number of reports gathering counter-intelligence information, which were circulated within the HV. A daily report was sent to the Chief of the Security Administration and members of his collegium. An extract of the daily report was sent to the HV General Staff Operative Centre. A monthly report was produced and submitted to the HV General Staff and the SDC. The HV General Staff could also seek information from the Security Administration on specific issues. Gajić, who during the time relevant to the Indictment served as the Chief of the Counter-Intelligence Department at the Security Administration of the HV
General Staff, testified that this was done frequently. 

1401.     The Security Administration had also contacts with foreign military diplomatic representatives, mostly from the Western countries, accredited in Zagreb. These contacts were usually maintained by the Chief of the Security Administration who would, if need be, inform Horvat about any important topics discussed with them. 

1402.      It was routine for the Intelligence Administration and Security Administration to share information with each other. 

1403.      The Trial Chamber notes that the Security Administration obtained information regarding the military activities of the the HVO directly from their counterparts in these armies. 
(d) Information Administration

1404.      The Information Administration was tasked with collecting and assessing the veracity of media information of interest to the HV before transmitting it to the HV General Staff with “what one may call a press clipping”. Horvat himself during a telephone conversation with Franjo Tuđman, confirmed that he watched the TV news. 

1405.      According to Borović, the HV never trusted the media treating the latter as being prone to propaganda and sensationalism. Although the HV General Staff considered those sources, it always tasked the Intelligence Administration to verify any information coming from the media. 
3. Information Flow between HV and HVO
(a) Coordination Meetings

1406.      As discussed earlier, the high representatives of the HVO and the HV held monthly coordination meetings in Zagreb in order to exchange data and strengthen the cooperation between these armies. 

1407.      On 27 September 1993, Horvat issued the following tasks to the branch section of the HV General Staff:







Ensure continuous, secure and protected communication with the the GŠ HVO. Ensure the inflow of as much verified intelligence as possible on the situation and condition in the HR H-B and their surroundings, with assessments of the effect of that situation on the degree of threat to the HR . 





1408.      Among the participants in those meetings were Horvat, Milivoj Petković, Mile Novaković and subsequently Milan Čeleketić or Dušan Lončar. Items of their agenda concerned “exchange of information and harmonisation of positions between the HV and HVO” including, inter alia, the issues of activity and assessment of the enemy, the results of the combat operations and
activities of the HVO forces, the security situation in the HR H-B, logistical requests and personnel problems. 

1409.      As an example, the Trial Chamber notes that the issue of “operative-strategic disposition of HVO troops” was discussed during the May 1994 coordination meeting. In the words of one witness:







Descriptions such as this one contributed to the competent officers in the GŠ HV and HVO getting a clear picture and full information about the situation and about the problems that existed, and, of course, the action that the SVK would take and the tasks that the SVK would implement in the forthcoming period, because that was useful for them in terms of their own
troops and their own tasks. 





Similarly, at the same meeting, Milivoj Petković gave a presentation on inter alia: “enemy strength, grouping and intentions”, possible further enemy operations and the situation in the HVO corps. 

1410.      The evidence suggests that at the coordination meetings no orders were issued by the HV to the SVK and/or the HVO. Mile Novaković even testified that he attended the first two or three meetings, but decided to appoint his subordinate to attend meetings thereafter explaining that “those meetings were not of importance because they were not beneficial”. 
(b) Other Meetings

1411.      Franjo Tuđman and Horvat held several meetings with the prominent members of the HVO. Some of these meetings were also attended by the highest authorities of the HR H-B. 

1412.      The record also shows that Horvat was holding quite regular meetings with Milivoj Petković. According to Siniša Borović, the latter visited Horvat “once per month or less”. There were also meetings where Franjo Tuđman and/or various military and political leaders of the HR, HVO
and/or HR H-B were present. 

1413.      On 9 July 1995, Horvat visited the commander of the 11th Corps in Vukovar and on a separate occasion in autumn he toured the units of 11th Corps. 

1414.      The evidence also shows that Horvat visited HR H-B in the period relevant to the Indictment. On 7 January 1994, he visited the Džokeri Unit Command."> The next day, he met with Petković and Galić in Vogošća. On 12 August 1994, Horvat met with Petković and the inner collegium of the Commander of the GŠ HVO in Crna Rijeka. Around 7 and 8 September 1994, Horvat visited Novi Grad on the Una River. On 18 July 1995, Horvat was in Han Pijesak meeting with inter alia Petković. 
(c) Reporting
(i) Regular Operations Reports

1415.     The evidence establishes that in the period of October 1993 until August 1995, the Main Staff was sending reports to the HV General Staff on quite a regular basis.

1416.      In October 1993, the Main Staff started sending weekly operation reports to the HV General Staff. The provision of those reports was laid down in the following document:







Chief of HV General Staff Operations Administration has agreed for the General Staff Operations and Training Organ to submit weekly operation report on the activities of the enemy, our forces and measures taken by General Staff in order to have better insight into the defence of , so the following has been done:-SVK General Staff Command has started to report to Operations Administration by sending a summary of weekly report. 





1417.      The task of operative reporting started functioning in November 1993. On 10 November

1993, the Commander of the Main Staff set forth a detailed procedure providing for reporting to the HV General Staff on a twice-per week basis:







In order to achieve full and high-quality drawing up of the combat reports and their timely submission to the HV GŠ …1.A combat report shall be submitted to the HR VSO … twice a week (on Mondays and
Thursdays).2.A combat report, which is to be drawn up and submitted, shall contain the following information:2.1. Enemy – situation, intentions, possibilities, combat activities carried out …2.2. Our forces: combat readiness status, planning, carrying out of the combat activities and results. Managing and commanding and problems. Training: commanding personnel, commands, units, recruits, critical fields etc. …2.2.1. Combat morale status: positive indicators, negative actions, problems and causes …2.2.2. Material and health security: men, situation and problems …2.2.3. Mobilization and personnel issues …2.2.4. Security: security situation in units and in the territory3. Cooperation with the UNPROFOR …4. Conclusions and forecast:4.1. Enemy …4.2. Status of our forces, conditions for problem solving …4.3. Situation in the territory: overall influence, direction and the intensity …5. Drafter of the report NŠ … .
Report items shall be completed by 14:00 hrs. each Monday and Friday, and shall be submitted to the Operations and Training Organ , which shall further integrate, process and submit them by
20.00 hrs to the HR VSO … . 



1418.      Miodrag Simić, a member of the HV General Staff administration, testified that on several occasions Horvat unsuccessfully requested the HVO Main Staffs to submit timely reports to the HV. At the same time, there is evidence of many examples of reports prepared in line with the abovementioned procedure and which between November 1993 and 26 August 1995 were sent
weekly to the Operations Centre of the HV General Staff, as well as to Horvat. There
is evidence that occasionally reports were sent more frequently - e.g. in April 1995 - even daily. 

1419.      Similarly, the evidence shows that the HVO copied the HV General Staff, or Horvat personally, on the operations reports sent, inter alia, to the President of HR H-B. According to Miodrag Simić this practice started even before Horvat became Chief of the HV General Staff. The Trial Chamber was presented with many such reports sent between 11 April 1994 and 28 August 1994
that included sections on enemy activities, the situation in the HVO Corps and combat actions carried out by the HVO units. Simić, while commenting on one of these reports, called it “a high- quality comprehensive document”. Although the Trial Chamber has not been provided with
reports for every day in the period relevant to the Indictment, the evidence suggests that the HVO
sent reports to the HV General Staff on a daily basis at least until 19 September 1995. On that day, Horvat sent a request to the HVO Main Staff to accept a group of HV liaison officers whose task would be to compile daily combat reports to be sent to the HV General Staff and issued an order regarding details of forming such a team to be dispatched as of 21 September 1995. According to Miodrag Simić, however, such teams were never sent to the HVO. 

1420.     The evidence confirms that the HVO reports were received by Horvat. It was common practice for a document addressed to the Chief of the HV General Staff personally to be delivered directly to him. An order dated 1 July 1994 also instructed the “duty operations team” of the HV General Staff to forward the daily HVO reports each morning to the Cabinet of the Chief of the HV General Staff. 

1421.     In addition to the HV General Staff receiving regular combat reports from the HVO Main Staff, the operations duty team of the HV General Staff was in direct contact with the HVO and could make requests for specific information. In a memorandum dated 11 May 1994, the HV General Staff requested the HVO Main Staff to provide information on the disposition and strength of forces in HR H-B at the coordination meeting to be held on 19 May 1994, and to “ensure that there is a phone contact through a secure line between the HV General Staff Duty Team Leader and yours,
every day at 06:00 hrs and 20:00 hrs”. 

1422.      The HVO was also receiving some reports and/or information from the HV. 
(ii) Reporting during Operation “Pauk”

1423.      Novaković testified that during Operation “Pauk” he sent combat reports to Horvat, the
Main Staff, and “from time to time” to the Croatian State Security Service to transmit to the attention
of Tuđman. He would send them to Horvat “about once a week”. Novaković also stated that he sent “extraordinary combat reports to Horvat to “keep him posted of the situation”. 
(iii) HVO Intelligence and Security Administrations’ Reports

1424.      Branko Gajić, testified that the Security Administration had “some ad hoc contacts and exchange s of information” with the security bodies of the HVO . However, according to him, it had “no formal relationship” with its counterparts in the two other armies. He also testified that the HV Security Administration never requested information from the HVO security organs nor invited their representatives to participate in HV meetings. 

1425.      At the same time, the Trial Chamber has been presented with evidence showing that the security organs reports to the HV. According to Branko Gajić, the Security Administration of the General Staff obtained sufficient information from the “official organs” and there was no need to have its own personnel deployed in the HR H-B. 

1426.     Rade Rašeta testified that as Chief of the Security Department in the Main Staff he was in daily contact with the Security Administration of the HV General Staff and in certain cases he reported to the chief of the latter. The reports concerned the personnel of the HV who were sent
for “temporary service” to the security sector in the SVK. Rašeta testified:







In view of the fact that the security service of the SVK used all instructions, all the rules, all special operational and technical means and cadres from the security of the General Staff of the Republic of Croatia, I had the duty, pursuant to all the applicable special measures and special measures as regulated by all our regulations, to report regularly to the Security
Administration of the General Staff of the Republic of Croatia. 





At the same time, he admitted that he did not have a duty to send reports to the HV General Staff concerning other matters. 

1427.      The evidence also shows that the senior members of the Security Administrations of the HVO Main Staffs occasionally met with their HV counterparts in Zagreb and passed on information about the military situation in the HR H-B. 

1428.      The Security Department of the Main Staff was responsible for preparing parts of combat reports which were regularly dispatched to the HV and which formed part of the regular operations reports discussed above. 

1429.     The Chamber notes that on 22 September 1993, the Intelligence Administration of the HV General Staff reported: “together with intelligence organs of the HVO we have established a system of mutual daily reporting of all significant data of interest to all three
parties”. 

1430.      On 23 November 1994, the 2nd Administration of the HV General Staff sent a coded telegram to the HVO Main Staff, stating:







On proposal of the 2nd Administration, the Chief of the General Staff of the Army of Croatia Col Gen A. Horvat has agreed to dispatch one officer from the 2nd Administration of the GŠ to the GŠ HVO Intelligence Organ, with the task of assisting your organs in the processing of information on the activities and the combat engagements of the enemy forces and the timely
submission of the said to this Administration. The cost of his stay in your Command shall be borne by the 2nd Administration of the GŠ HV, while the GŠ HVO shall provide him with the accommodation and include him in your work. 





1431.     Rade Orlić testified that in his capacity as the Main Staff Chief Intelligence Officer, he would “from time to time as required” share intelligence information about activities and
movements of Bosnian and Croatian armies with the HVO and the HV. Orlić would also request
 and, at times, would receive information from the HVO or the HV when necessary. This type of communication was transmitted using telegrams. 

1432.      Similarly, the evidence shows that the Intelligence and Security Section of the HVO Main Staff was copying the HV General Staff Security Administration and/or Intelligence Administration on its intelligence reports, even on a daily basis during some periods. 
(iv) Ad Hoc Reports and Communication Lines

1433.      The evidence shows that Horvat was also receiving ad hoc reports from prominent figures in the HVO. The Trial Chamber has been presented with some reports sent by the Commander of the Main Staff directly to Horvat. Similarly, on 15 August 1995, Horvat
received a report from the Air-Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence Organ of the SVK. The record
also includes a report sent on 11 April 1994 by Milivoj Petković directly to Horvat. The HV General Staff was also copied on some reports sent by Petković to various HR H-B political and military authorities. Moreover, the document pertaining to the discussion held on 15 September 1995, mentions a telegram sent by Milovanović (the Chief of Staff of the HVO Main Staff) to Horvat informing him about the HVO territorial losses. 

1434.      There were also encoded lines of communication between the HV General Staff and the SVK Main Staff, the SVK and Franjo Tuđman, as well as the HV General Staff and the HVO Main
Staff. Such lines and their supporting infrastructure already existed before Horvat assumed the position of the HV General Staff Commander. Members of the Main Staffs of the HVO, and the HV General Staff communicated directly through such lines. There were instances of the SVK Corps Commanders communicating directly with Horvat. There existed also analogue radio connections between the HV, HVO . Moreover, the evidence shows that
at least as of September 1995, Horvat had direct communication with the Commander of the HVO Corps District Orasje and indirectly also with the HVO Herzegovina Corps. 

1435.      Further, there existed an intelligence centre in Petrova Gora – in the area of the SVK 21st Kordun Corps. This centre was part of the intelligence department of the HV General Staff and was in charge of monitoring activities of foreign military formations and reporting this to the intelligence administration of the HV General Staff. This centre was not subordinated to the
SVK. 
(d) Conclusion

1436.      The Trial Chamber finds that there were multiple channels through which the information flowed from SVK and the HVO to the HV General Staff. Through the system of regular reports,
monthly meetings in Zagreb, various other ad hoc instances of reporting and exchanges of
information, during his tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff, Horvat was well informed of all important aspects on the functioning of the SVK and the HVO as well as their activities.

1437.     The exact content of subjects discussed at the meetings and/or reports sent to the HV General
Staff by the Main Staffs of the HVO will be discussed in a separate part of the
Judgement devoted to Horvat’s knowledge of the crimes charged in the Indictment. 
J. Horvat’s Knowledge of the Crimes Committed in Mostar and Ahmići
1. Submissions of the Parties

1438.      The Prosecution submits that Horvat knew that the HVO had a discriminatory intent to commit the crimes in BiH and that the HVO committed ethnic cleansing in BiH. It posits that Horvat had this knowledge before becoming Chief of the HV General Staff and “this knowledge continued throughout his tenure”. The Prosecution also submits that it is not necessary to establish that
Horvat had knowledge of specific incidents alleged in the Indictment. 

1439.      The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to demonstrate that the HVO was engaged in criminal behaviour or that Horvat knew of that criminal behaviour. It submits that UNSC resolutions that refer to wrongful conduct usually attributed such conduct to Bosnian Croat paramilitaries and not to the HVO. 

1440.      The Trial Chamber will first consider whether Horvat was aware of criminal conduct and discriminatory intent on the part of the HVO in the BiH theatre of war generally and second, whether he knew of crimes committed by the HVO specifically in Mostar and Ahmići. Horvat’s awareness of the discriminatory intent of the HVO and criminal conduct in this context will serve as a basis for the finding as to whether Horvat knew that crimes would probably be committed in Mostar and Ahmići, and that crimes committed in those areas would probably be followed by further crimes.
2. Horvat’s Knowledge of the HVO’s Criminal Conduct

1441.      The trial record includes evidence regarding Horvat’s knowledge of the HVO’s conduct from periods preceding and following his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. The Trial Chamber will discuss the evidence relating to these two periods in turn.
(a) Evidence Preceding Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

1442.      The Trial Chamber will analyse whether the evidence demonstrates that Horvat was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV
General Staff.

1443.      The Trial Chamber recalls that prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff on
26 August 1993, Horvat served as the commander of the JNA Artillery School Centre in Zadar, Croatia until January 1992, when he was appointed Commander of the JNA 13th Corps in BiH. He held this position until the formal withdrawal of the JNA from BiH in May 1992, when he became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army of the HV. 

1444.      In his OTP interview, Horvat stated that in April 1992, when he was Commander of the JNA
13th Corps Bileća Corps in BiH, he refused Boban’s offer to become HVO Commander. Horvat explained that among his reasons for doing so had been the fact that “they wanted an ethnically clean army, and he was against that”. 

1445.      In the same interview, Horvat noted that the Bileća Corps had responsibility over an area that contained three big Muslim enclaves, Stolac, Kula Fazlagića, and Podveležje. Horvat declared that while he was present in the area, “not a single Muslim was killed by soldiers and not a single soldier was killed by Muslims”, but that after he left in June 1992, “the exodus in this territory
started”. 

1446.      The OTP interview is corroborated by the following evidence. On 27 May 1993, when Horvat was the 3rd HV Army Commander, the Supreme Command Staff held a meeting with the commanders of the HV’s Armies, which Horvat was ordered to attend."> At the meeting, HR President Dobrica Ćosić commented that the assistance of the HV to the HVO “was huge, so the reserves have dwindled”. He added: “[w]e unnecessarily and irrationally used up massive war reserves. That is particularly apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina. How could we allow one
commander using more than 5,000 shells around Kiseljak to unnecessarily destroy Muslim houses? For such an irrational act, he should, at the very least, have been stripped of his rank of officer”. 

1447.      On 26 August 1993, the day on which Horvat became Chief of the HV General Staff, the HVO Corps District Tomislavgrad Command wrote a congratulatory letter to him, reflecting the desire to join the HV and HVO to create a unified Croatian state:









Your appointment comes at a difficult and complicated time, when the Croat people are fighting for their freedom and dignity, proving to the whole world that their fight is justified, a fight that is
becoming increasingly acknowledged, justified, as it fills us with confidence that that we will withstand until a final victory.We wish you to settle at your new duty as soon as possible, to choose your associates, transform the army where needed, removing the weaknesses of the old system and the former JNA, creating together a unified Croatian state and army, a state in which all the Croats will live together, proudly
and with dignity. 





1448.     The Trial Chamber is satisfied that this evidence shows that by the time he became Chief of the HV General Staff, Horvat knew that the HVO wanted an ethnically pure army and Croatian state, and that he was aware of instances of criminal behaviour by the HVO against Muslims in BiH.

1449.      In addition to the foregoing evidence of Horvat’s direct knowledge, there is evidence suggesting that, prior to Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff, the HR leadership was aware of allegations of ethnic cleansing in BiH. This evidence is summarised briefly below.

1450.      Between May 1992 and May 1993, the UNSC adopted several resolutions and issued statements expressing alarm about ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH, although the HVO was not expressly accused of those crimes:
- 
Resolution 752 of 15 May 1992 called upon all parties to the conflict to ensure that “the forcible expulsion of persons from the areas where they live and any attempts to change the ethnic composition of the population [...] cease immediately”. - 
On 30 May 1992, Resolution 757 imposed sanctions on the HR, “deploring [...] that [this call] has not been heeded”. - 
On 4 August 1992, the UNSC President issued a statement referring to continued reports of widespread violations of international humanitarian law (“IHL”) within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and in the BiH particularly. - 
Resolution 771 of 13 August 1992 strongly condemned the practice of “ethnic cleansing” and expressed “grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of
[IHL] occurring within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and especially in [BiH],
including reports of mass forcible expulsion and deportation of civilians, … deliberate
attacks on non-combatants, hospitals and ambulances, … and wanton devastation and destruction of property”. - 
(v) Resolution 780 of 6 October 1992 again expressed grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of IHL occurring within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and especially in BiH, including reports of mass killings and the continuance of the practice of
“ethnic cleansing”. It also called on the UN Secretary-General to establish an impartial
Commission of Experts to investigate violations of IHL. - 
(vi) Resolution 808 of 22 February 1993 again expressed grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of IHL in the former Yugoslavia including reports of mass killings and the practice of “ethnic cleansing”, and decided that an international tribunal would be established to prosecute persons responsible for serious violations of IHL. - 
(vii) Resolution 827 of 25 May 1993 reiterated the UNSC’s grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread and flagrant violations of IHL in BiH, including the practice of “ethnic cleansing”. Resolution 827 also established the ICTY. - 
(viii) On 16 April 1993, the UNSC took note of the ICJ’s Order of 8 April 1993 in which the ICJ had indicated that as a provisional measure, the HR government should immediately take all measures within its power to prevent genocide. The UNSC also reaffirmed its condemnation of all violations of IHL, including “ethnic cleansing”;
expressed concern about the “pattern of hostilities by Bosnian Croat paramilitary units against towns and villages in eastern Bosnia”; and demanded that the HR immediately cease the supply of military arms, equipment and services to the Bosnian Croat paramilitary units in BiH. - 
(ix) On 24 August 1993, the UNSC passed Resolution 859, which particularly noted that the Bosnian Croat Party had yet to comply with all relevant UNSC resolutions and
condemned “all war crimes and other violations of international humanitarian law, by whomever committed, Bosnian Croats or other individuals”. The Resolution further expressed “ concern about the continuing siege of Mostar, Mostar and other threatened cities”. 

1451.      On 18 August 1992, five days after the UNSC issued Resolution 771, the HR leadership discussed information it had received from the UN about the HR’s alleged assistance in ethnic cleansing. Milan Panić, President of the Federal Government of the HR, explained that he had been personally informed by the UN that he should stop the ethnic cleansing in Sanski Most, where
15,000 Muslims had been given eight hours to leave their homes and travel twenty kilometres to Jajce. Panić expressed deep concern that the HR could not silence the persistent talk about ethnic cleansing, and that it did not matter what the HR actually did or said but only “what the whole world thinks”. 

1452.      Also in August 1992, the UN Human Rights Commission appointed Tadeusz Mazowiecki as Special Rapporteur to report on the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Prior to Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff, Mazowiecki issued five reports, which concluded that ethnic cleansing had been committed in Croat-controlled areas with the involvement of “Croat soldiers” and “Croatian mercenaries”. Muhamed Sacirbey, the BiH Ambassador to the UN during the war, testified that Mazowiecki received most of his information on the ground, and that he reviewed the facts in the BiH first-hand. Sacirbey also
testified that Mazowiecki’s reports were extensively covered in the media. 

1453.      The commission of crimes “by Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina” was mentioned at the 6th SDC Session on 9 December 1992. At the 8th SDC Session on 12 March 1993, one of Mazowiecki’s reports was mentioned in the context of a discussion on paramilitary formations and alleged human rights violations. 

1454.      The evidence demonstrates that prior to Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff, the HR leadership monitored what other countries were saying about the HR’s involvement in the war, and that it was aware of allegations of ethnic cleansing in BiH made by the UN and by Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki.

1455.      The following observations and findings on the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge Moloto dissenting.

1456.      The Majority notes that no direct evidence shows that Horvat had knowledge of the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports issued prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. However, the Majority recalls that these documents expressing alarm about serious violations
of IHL, ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH were public documents. Furthermore, the Majority notes that between January and May 1992, at a time when the situation was already rapidly deteriorating in BiH, Horvat was stationed in BiH and was therefore directly exposed to these events. Thereafter, in May 1992, Horvat held a position of authority as Chief of
Staff and Deputy Commander of the 3rd Army within the HV and in April 1993, he became the
Commander of the 3rd Army. As Commander of the 3rd Army, Horvat attended meetings of the
Supreme Command Staff where the HR leadership also discussed events related to the conflict. The Majority also notes that the criminal allegations denounced by the international community were extensively covered in the media and of such a scale and gravity that the Tribunal was established to investigate and prosecute them. Based on this circumstantial evidence, the Majority finds that the evidence leads to the only reasonable inference that Horvat generally knew of basic
allegations of war crimes reported in the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports already
prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. 
(b) Evidence Following Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

1457.     The Trial Chamber will now consider whether the evidence demonstrates that after being appointed Chief of the HV General Staff, and throughout the period relevant to the Indictment, Horvat was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and propensity to commit crimes.
(i) Statements by Horvat

1458.      In his OTP interview, Horvat was questioned about his relationship with Petković while serving as Chief of the HV General Staff. Horvat stated:







Well, he was keeping a certain distance from me, because he knew very well that I was against any illicit actions in the course of implementation of tasks. The entire leadership of the HR H-B knew that I was against any destruction of buildings, against any …. use of force against the civilian
population and so on. 



1459.      At the 21st SDC Session on 7 June 1994, Horvat raised the issue of Muslim military students from the HR H-B who were completing their education in the HV. He warned: “this is very important, if we send the Muslims there i.e., to the HR H-B, they’ll kill them”. 

1460.      These statements show that Horvat was aware that the HVO was committing crimes against civilians in BiH in the implementation of its objectives and was particularly hostile to Muslims.
(ii) Information Received through the UN and Other Diplomatic Channels

1461.      The HR government received, through the UN and other diplomatic channels, a large amount of information about crimes committed by the HVO against the civilian population in BiH, including “ethnic cleansing”.

1462.      Sacirbey testified that between May 1992 and the end of 1995, representatives of BiH (although not Sacirbey himself) had extensive contacts with the staff of the HR mission to the UN, including the HR ambassador. These contacts were more extensive towards the end of this
period. Sacirbey testified that the HR representatives were quite well informed as to the events
in BiH. The issues that the BiH tried to bring to the attention of the HR representatives included reports on atrocities and military actions within BiH, reports by the UN Secretary-General on the condition of the population, and the effects of military actions on the humanitarian situation, including the delivery of food and medicines. 

1463.      Sacirbey also testified that, starting in the fall of 1992, the UNGA and the UNSC held frequent discussions about the war in BiH, and that, as far as he was aware, a representative of the HR mission had always been present. The UNSC was able to draw on information from various sources, including UNPROFOR, UN rapporteurs, the EU monitoring system and other
organisations of states, individual UN member states, and the media. The UNSC also received
reports from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the ICRC. Sacirbey testified that while the UNSC received some confidential briefings, by and large, most of the information that was available to the UNSC was eventually available to all member states, as well as to diplomatic staff and the media. 

1464.      Sacirbey further testified that whenever the BiH UN Mission received relevant information about the war from a credible source, it would pass the information on to the President of the UNSC, or sometimes to the UN Secretary-General or the UNGA, with a request that the information be distributed as a document of that UN organ to all member states, including the
FRY. In some instances, the BiH Mission would send the information directly to the
representatives of member states. Sacirbey testified that the information forwarded by the BiH Mission mostly concerned such topics as the “human situation on the ground”, the “abuse of the population, what we referred to at that time as genocide”, and the “humanitarian situation, the interruption of food and medicines”. Sacirbey estimated that the BiH Mission forwarded about
200 documents per year, as it tried to convey—to the HR, to the international community, and to the media—not only individual acts that occurred, but also a “systematic approach on the part of the
forces of the HR and their agents in Bosnia”. 

1465.      On 27 May 1994, a Commission of Experts, established pursuant to UNSC Resolution
780, produced a report in which it examined the evidence of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions and violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. The Commission concluded that a policy of “ethnic cleansing” had been put into practice by Croats in BiH and Croatia and by their supporters in the HR. Sacirbey testified that the report was the subject of extensive discussion at the UN—at least prior to the report being published—and was widely discussed and disseminated in the media. The report was published in its entirety in the Zagreb newspaper Borba between 14 July 1994 and 12 August 1994. 

1466.      In its report, the Commission of Experts described the pattern of ethnic cleansing in the BiH
as follows:







First, Bosnian Croat paramilitary forces, often with the assistance of the JNA, seize control of the area. In many cases, Croatian residents are told to leave the area before the violence begins. The homes of non-Croat residents are targeted for destruction and cultural and religious monuments, especially churches and mosques, are destroyed. Second, the area falls under the control of paramilitary forces who terrorize the non-Croat residents with random killings, rapes and looting. Third, the seized area is administered by local Croat authorities, often in conjunction with paramilitary groups. During this phase, non-Croat residents are detained, beaten, and sometimes
transferred to prison camps where further abuse, including mass killings, have occurred. 





1467.     The Commission found that the manner in which the policy of ethnic cleansing was carried out by Croats in Bosnia was “consistent throughout a certain geographic area represented by an arc ranging from northern Bosnia and covering areas in eastern and western Bosnia”, and that the practice of ethnic cleansing was carried out in “strategic areas
linking Croatia proper with Croat-inhabited areas of Bosnia”. 

1468.      The Commission observed that the “JNA and Army of the so-called ‘Bosnian-Croat
Republic’ have been involved in carrying out and facilitating the policy and practices of ‘ethnic cleansing’ in certain parts of the territory”, and that the “leaders of Bosnian Croats influenced,
encouraged, facilitated and condoned” the most marginal social elements of Bosnian society to carry out the crimes implementing the policy of ethnic cleansing. The Commission concluded that the practice of ethnic cleansing was purposeful and systematic, and carried out by “persons from all segments of the Croatian population in the area described: members of the army, militias, special forces, the police and civilians”. 

1469.      On 23 September 1994, the UNSC issued Resolution 941, in which it took note of information provided by the UNHCR and the ICRC, contained in other relevant reports, regarding “grave violations of international humanitarian law affecting the non-Croat population in those areas of the BiH under the control of Bosnian Croat force”. The UNSC expressed grave concern at the “persistent and systematic campaign of terror perpetrated by the Herceg-Bosna forces in Banja
Luka, Bijeljina and other areas of the BiH under the control of Bosnian Croat forces”, and emphasised that “this practice of ‘ethnic cleansing’ by the Herceg-Bosna forces constitutes a clear violation of international humanitarian law”. Acting under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, the UNSC demanded that the “Bosnian Croat authorities immediately cease their campaign of ‘ethnic
cleansing’”. 

1470.      Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki continued to submit reports to the UN on the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia until August 1995, after which Mazowiecki’s successor, Elisabeth Rehn, submitted another report in November 1995. These reports were
released as documents of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the Human Rights
Commission. They were circulated to the entire UN membership, including the HR. Sacirbey testified that these reports were also discussed extensively at the UNSC. 

1471.      Mazowiecki’s reports brought to light information about instances of murder, rape, forced deportation, ethnic cleansing, detention, denial of access to water and medicine, and destruction of cultural and religious sites. 

1472.      The evidence shows that HR representatives received and were familiar with the content of Mazowiecki’s reports. In a note verbale to the ECOSOC sub-commission, the HR Mission to the UN provided detailed comments on Mazowiecki’s sixth periodic report and noted that it had previously responded to Mazowiecki’s earlier reports. Further, Sacirbey testified that HR representatives were present when the reports were discussed within the UNSC and other UN bodies. Sacirbey also testified that the reports were discussed in the media including those in the Balkans. 

1473.     The case between BiH and Croatia before the ICJ on the application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide also put on notice the HR authorities of allegations of HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal behaviour. The HR responded to the BiH’s application of 20 March 1993 and the proceedings lasted throughout the Indictment period. 

1474.      The following evidence shows that Horvat was generally concerned about and aware of the international community’s views about Bosnian Croats’ activity in BiH.

1475.      On 23 February 1994, Horvat wrote to Boban, Petković and HVO Corps Commanders, stating that he had received information from reliable sources that “in the EU a mood exists that the smallest of incidents in the territory of the former BH, for which the Croat side could be blamed,
could be used as a cause for utilising close air support to UN forces”. 

1476.      At the 25th SDC Session on 30 August 1994, the Chief of the HV Intelligence Administration, Colonel Branko Krga, under Horvat’s instruction and in Horvat’s presence, gave a presentation. Krga explained that since the HR had accepted the peace plan of the Contact Group, the international community had taken a more favourable attitude toward the HR. He noted that “after a long period of isolation and accusations, a profoundly new attitude of the international
community towards the HR is becoming apparent”, as reflected in visits paid by foreign political delegations and in “more favourable coverage of the HR by foreign media, including those from Germany and America”. Krga also analysed how the HR should respond to imposed
sanctions. Krga explained that “ i n our contacts with international representatives, we must
insist that the issue of installing observers on the river Neretva be never put on the agenda of UNSC”. He cautioned that even if the HR were to accept observers, sanctions would not automatically be lifted, as new conditions were raised, including “the issue of human rights, readiness to cooperate with the International War Crimes Tribunal, etc”. Finally, Krga mapped
out possible political scenarios if the HR H-B were to reject the peace plan. He concluded that “ h aving analysed the reaction of the international community”, the HR’s best option was to continue seeking a political solution in the BiH, but noted that “it is obvious that the most important international players have agreed that they would not allow any party to achieve a compelling
victory, or establish Muslim or Croatian ethnically pure states”. 

1477.      The Defence argues generally that there is insufficient evidence to infer that the information about the war provided to the HR Mission to the UN or to the HR authorities in Zagreb was in fact known by Horvat. More specifically, the Defence argues that there is no evidence that Horvat personally had knowledge of discussions held at the UNSC sessions or of the BiH Mission’s communications to the UNSC. 

1478.      The evidence shows that Horvat, as Chief of the HV General Staff, was directly informed about at least some of the UNSC proceedings and communications concerning accusation of crimes committed by the HVO. Throughout the war, the HR Mission to the UN sent numerous diplomatic
cables to the HR leadership in Zagreb to inform them about discussions held and resolutions
adopted by the UNSC. Horvat was copied directly on several of those cables concerning shelling and sniping incidents in Mostar, as well as the HVO attack on Ahmići. That evidence shows not only that Horvat was aware of certain discussions by the UNSC, but also that Horvat knew that the HVO was being accused of attacking civilians and committing other serious violations of international humanitarian law. Moreover, Colonel Krga’s presentation at the 25th SDC Session shows that both the HV Intelligence Administration and Horvat personally were aware of the
UNSC’s agenda and more generally of the international community’s political views and attitudes, including international media coverage, regarding the conflict in BiH. 

1479.      The Defence also argues that there is no evidence that Horvat read or had any knowledge of the Mazowiecki reports issued by the UN Commission on Human Rights. While there is no direct evidence that Horvat knew about the reports, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, makes the following observations.

1480.     The Majority recalls that the Mazowiecki reports were discussed extensively at the UNSC (in the presence of HR representatives). The diplomatic cables copied to Horvat and the presentation by Colonel Krga also show that Horvat was put on notice of at least certain proceedings before the UNSC. Furthermore, the HR Mission deemed the Mazowiecki reports sufficiently important to formally respond to at least several of them. The fact that, as the Defence points out, the HR Mission rejected the content of the reports, confirms that the Mission was aware of their content. Mazowiecki’s reports were among the documents that BiH filed with the ICJ in support of its application against Croatia, a high profile case that was the subject of UNSC Resolution 819. Finally, Mazowiecki’s conclusions about the humanitarian
situation in BiH were discussed in the media, and Horvat was informed of the media’s reporting
on the war in BiH. On 22 July 1994, the Borba Daily published an article with the headline “What does the Federal Government hold against Tadeusz Mazowiecki’s Sixth Report on the Human Rights situation in the HR?”, in which it described the HR’s criticism of Mazowiecki’s report, raised in its note verbale to the ECOSOC sub-commission. 

1481.     The Defence argues that there is no evidence that Horvat or anyone from the HV or HV intelligence organs read the publication in Borba regarding the report by the UN Commission of Experts about violations of IHL in the former Yugoslavia. While there is no direct evidence that Horvat read the report as published in Borba, the Majority is satisfied that the publication was
available to him. In this regard, the Majority recalls the evidence that Horvat was kept abreast of media information through the Information Administration of the HV General Staff. 

1482.     The Majority finds that, collectively, the aforesaid evidence leads to the only reasonable conclusion that the Mazowiecki reports—which were periodically issued from 1992 to 1995—were of such interest to the HR authorities and were publicised to such an extent that the information contained therein was known to Horvat.
(c) Conclusion

1483.      The following observations and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge Moloto dissenting.

1484.      The Trial Chamber finds that direct evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew even before being appointed Chief of the HV General Staff that the HVO was perpetrating gratuitous acts of violence against Bosnian Muslims and that the international community considered the crimes occurring in BiH to be of such magnitude that an extraordinary step was taken in creating the Tribunal. Furthermore, Horvat’s statements in his interview corroborate his direct knowledge of the ethnic hostilities during the war and that Petković was using force against civilians.

1485.      In addition to the foregoing direct evidence, the Majority recalls the evidence that the Chief of the HV’s Intelligence Administration, Colonel Branko Krga, made a presentation to the HR SDC reporting the views of the international community, inter alia, on questions of human rights and the creation of the Tribunal. The Majority recalls that Horvat, as Chief of the HV General Staff,
was in charge of the “highest professional and staff organ for the preparation and use of the Army
in times of peace and war”. By virtue of his position, he closely monitored the events unfolding in BiH, a bordering country where a conflict was ongoing. The evidence that Horvat received daily reports on information gathered by his intelligence and security organs. Miodrag Simić, Chief of the 1st Administration within the HV from November 1994, testified that it was in “the interest of the HV for the sake of its security to be constantly informed of what was going on in that area”. Against this backdrop, the Majority is of the view that Krga’s presentation is not an isolated example and that the HV’s Intelligence Administration regularly informed Horvat of the events in BiH and general opinion of the international community. In this regard, the Majority recalls that the international community was widely concerned about grave allegations of human rights abuses committed by Croat military forces in BiH from the beginning stages of the war. These allegations were extensively and regularly discussed at the UNSC, in diplomatic circles and in the international media, and were matters of common knowledge. The Majority concludes that the only reasonable inference is that the HV’s Intelligence Administration notified Horvat of these criminal allegations.

1486.      Based on the aforementioned evidence, the Majority is satisfied that Horvat, from the early stages of the war, was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH.

1487.      The Trial Chamber will now consider to what extent Horvat had specific knowledge that the
HVO was committing crimes in Mostar.
3. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Mostar

1488.      The Trial Chamber has been presented with direct evidence to show that Horvat, once he became Chief of the HV General Staff, was informed about several incidents in Mostar.
(a) Diplomatic Cables

1489.     In 1994 and 1995, Horvat was directly copied on the following two diplomatic cables from the HR’s UN Mission in New York: 
- 
A cable dated 7 February 1994 discussed the international community’s reaction to two of the Scheduled Incidents in the Indictment: the artillery attack on the Dobrinja suburb
of Mostar on 4 February 1994 (“Scheduled Incident A2”), and the shelling of Markale market in Mostar on 5 February 1994 (Markale I) (“Scheduled Incident A3”). It specifically referred to “Saturday’s incident in Mostar” and referenced an UNPROFOR finding that the “Croatian side was responsible for the previous attack on Dobrinja (4 February 1994)”. The cable stated that as a result of the most recent incident, NATO air-strikes against the Croat artillery positions outside Mostar were being considered. The cable also referenced an UNPROFOR finding that the Croat artillery positions were
“responsible for the attacks on civilian targets in the city”. - 
A cable dated 10 April 1995 stated that UN Under-Secretary-General Gharekhan had reported that the “situation in and around Mostar” had “worsened” and that “sniper activities and artillery attacks from large calibre guns had increased”. The cable added
that in one day, “three 120mm projectiles were fired on Mostar from the positions of Bosnian Croats, after which UN requested NATO’s reconnaissance flights above the city”. 

1490.      In addition to the diplomatic cables copied to Horvat directly, the HV General Staff received two cables from the HR’s London Mission relating to the siege of Mostar. On 11 January 1994, the Mission informed the HV Intelligence Administration that top British officials were of the
opinion that “the bombardment of Mostar must be halted at once”. On 7 February 1994, the
Mission—apparently referring to the Markale I shelling (Scheduled Incident A3)—informed the Intelligence Administration that “ t he mass media here and in the West are widely manipulating the latest massacre of civilians in Mostar and pressing governments to adopt a decision on air
strikes against Croatian positions around Mostar”. 

1491.      Horvat was also copied on a telegram from the HR Mission in Rome, dated 9 December
1994, that provided information about crimes in Mostar. The telegram asserted that recent reporting by the Italian media about the situation in BiH had been one-sided, in that blame was placed on the Croats and that the most-quoted sources were UNPROFOR, representatives of humanitarian organisations, and special rapporteurs. According to the telegram, the main point of
the media reports had been that the HVO continued their attacks by, among other things,
firing missiles on the facilities of the Muslim government in Mostar and blocking humanitarian aid on land and in the air, which would lead to hunger and freezing of the population in Bihać and Mostar. The telegram stated that by way of contrast there had been no media reports on “what the Muslims or the Croats are doing”. 

1492.      At the 18th SDC Session on 7 February 1994, two days after the Markale I incident (Scheduled Incident A3) had occurred, Horvat addressed the use of certain explosive devices in Mostar and cited the explosion of a shell that had resulted in “massive losses”. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that this discussion concerned the Markale I incident, as at the SDC meeting, Horvat described the explosion site as a small area that was closed off on all sides by buildings, where a large number of people was concentrated, and which featured a tram stop. Franjo Tuđman added that the shell had purportedly hit a “stall”. The Trial Chamber notes that Horvat
also stated that people in the HR H-B maintained that they were not responsible for the incident, and he expressed the view that the likelihood was indeed small. He added:







I think that it would be a good idea to prepare special projectiles that do not hit the ground and to have the Government of the Republic of Croatia issue a statement. Our military experts claim that this is impossible. We assume that the same was done in Vase Miskina Street- that the explosive was prepared ahead of time and placed in a number of spots and that at a given moment the signal was given to set it off when the largest number of people were there. Second, there are those who believe that one of their projectiles which was just supposed to mask those effects was actually used. That’s our understanding. The likelihood that a 120mm calibre projectile can kill so many people in that space is very small. We assume that the mujahedin did it, because they are against any kind of negotiations and agreements. Second the possibility that the Croats did it can not be excluded, so as to divert the attention from the threat of sanctions. It is impossible
that the Croats in Mostar set it up, except from a distance. 





1493.      At a 29 August 1995 meeting in Dobanovci of the highest political and military leadership of the HR and the HR H-B, including Horvat, President Tuđman addressed the fact that a shell had been fired at Markale and had killed a number of civilians. Tuđman cited a UN source as
stating that it had been proved that the shell was fired from Croatian positions, while Petković cited
a statement by a different UN source which, in Petković’s view, demonstrated that the shell could not have come from Croatian positions 

1494.      On 11 October 1995, the Intelligence Administration of the HV General Staff reported to the HR MOD on the Markale II incident (Scheduled Incident A9) discussing UNPROFOR’s accusation that the HVO was responsible for the shelling:







By repeating the scenario at the Mostar Markale market on 28 August 1995 at 1120 hours, fresh conditions have been created for giving the Croats yet another ultimatum by NATO. Namely, only half an hour after the event mentioned above, Muslim TV screened images from the location of the incident blaming the Croats for it … . The following day … UNPROFOR blamed Croats for the massacre, a ballistic expert carried out an expert examination only at 1100 hours. The expert examination was not carried out on location (they did not allow the Muslims to carry it out) but on the basis of photographs, sketches and TV images. The dead and the wounded were not examined,
nor was any type of medical examination carried out. 





1495.     In addition to the evidence discussed above, the Trial Chamber has been presented with significant circumstantial evidence which includes documentation by the international community of crimes committed in Mostar and widespread media coverage of the siege of Mostar.
(b) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Mostar

1496.      Starting in the spring of 1992, the UNSC discussed the shelling and sniping campaign in Mostar almost daily and issued several resolutions on the topic. Sacirbey also testified that leading up to the issuance of UNSC Resolution 764 in July 1992, he and his staff informed the HR representatives to the UN directly about a shelling that killed dozens of people standing in a Mostar bread line, as well as about other aspects of the siege. Further, starting in October
1992, Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki began issuing regular reports in which he described the humanitarian situation in Mostar—reports of which HR authorities were aware. Among other things, Mazowiecki reported that the indiscriminate shelling of Mostar had caused countless civilian deaths" and that hospitals in Mostar were routinely and deliberately shelled. Mazowiecki concluded that while “all sides are guilty of use of military force against civilian populations and relief operations in Mostar”, “the main responsibility lies with the Croatian forces,
since it is they who have adopted the tactic of laying siege on the city”. 

1497.      As discussed above, Sacirbey testified that he forwarded numerous documents to the President of the UNSC with the request that they be distributed as public documents to all UN member states, including the HR. These documents included several letters from November
1994, May 1995 and June 1995, in which the BiH Mission reported shelling and sniping attacks by Bosnian Croats against civilian targets in Mostar, such as the Holiday Inn and the Marin Dvor and Hrasnica neighbourhoods. In one of the letters, Sacirbey reported the killing of five children by a shell fired by Bosnian Croats, and then further described what he considered to be a pattern of shelling and sniping, whereby long lulls in the attacks drew the civilian population out to
the streets, at which time “the shells from the hills hit once again, sometimes with no success in finding victims and other times claiming scores of them”. 

1498.      On 7 January 1994, the President of the UNSC issued a statement in which the SC strongly condemned the “continuing military pressure on and the relentless bombardment by Herceg-Bosna forces of the BiH capital city, Mostar”, and called for an immediate end to the attacks on the city, which had resulted in “a high number of civilian casualties, seriously disrupted essential
services and aggravated an already severe humanitarian situation”. 

1499.      The 27 May 1994 report of the UN Commission of Experts stated that the “siege and relentless bombardment from the hills surrounding Mostar has taken a tremendous physical toll on the city and its inhabitants”. It noted that the Herceg-Bosna forces have “concentrated their efforts on weakening the city through constant bombardment from the surrounding hillsides” and cited estimates by UNPROFOR that the daily shelling ranged from 200 to 300 impacts on a quiet day to
800 to 1,000 impacts on an active day. The report found: (i) a pattern of specific targeting of
certain locations, including the Koševo Hospital, the public transportation system, the Dobrinja apartment complex, the flour mill and main bakery, and the shopping district; (ii) a pattern of
systematic shelling of cultural and religious structures and public utilities; and (iii) a pattern of random shelling throughout the civilian areas of the city, which had a “terror-inspiring effect on the civilian population” and resulted in deaths, injuries and destruction in “such well-known non- military structures as schools, open streets, public parks, football and athletic fields, cemeteries,
hospitals, and even bread, water and relief lines in the city”. The report also mentioned the
Markale I incident, noting that on 5 February 1994 at least 68 persons were killed and 200 others were wounded in the shelling of the market in the city centre”. 

1500.      As discussed above, the report of the Commission of Experts was distributed by the UNSC to the UN membership, was discussed extensively at the UN, and was discussed and distributed in the media —including through publication in full in Borba. 

1501.      Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki reported periodically about the siege of Mostar until
1995. As discussed above, his reports were released as ECOSOC documents and circulated to all UN members, including the HR, and the HR responded to the reports." Among other things, Mazowiecki reported the following:
- 
On 26 August 1993, “the civilian population of Mostar has been subjected to brutal violations of the laws on the conduct of war”, observing that “ t he arbitrary killing of civilians … has become a permanent feature of life in the city”. He reported that at the Dobrinja check-point, located 400 meters from the front line, 130 persons had reportedly
been killed and more than 300 wounded by sniper fire from Bosnian Croat positions. - 
On 17 November 1993, mortar attacks by Herceg-Bosna forces on Mostar earlier that month had killed twelve persons, including children. - 
On 21 February 1994, “Mostar remains subject to indiscriminate attacks and to sniping, directed from territory held by the Bosnian Croats”. He reported that by early January 1994, there were on average 1,000 shell or rocket impacts per day, and that many civilians had lost their lives. He concluded that “ a lthough a number of Bosnian Croat attacks on Mostar occur in response to firing by forces of the army of Bosnia and Herzegovina from positions situated close to highly sensitive civilian locations, most attacks would appear to be indiscriminate”. He also observed that the Markale I shelling (Scheduled Incident A3) which had killed 68 and wounded 200, was “one of the worst attacks perpetrated on civilians during the war”. - 
On 4 November 1994, “attacks by Herceg-Bosna forces on the civilians of Mostar also manifest themselves by means of blocking of services essential for city life”. He added that “the heightened scale of attacks and threats to the people of Mostar …
reversed the dramatic improvements of last summer”. - 
On 16 January 1995, there had been an intensification of attacks on Mostar in November and December 1994. He reported that three children and one adult woman had been killed by sniper fire and mortars; that the Holiday Inn hotel had been hit by two grenades fired from Bosnian Croat army positions; and that Herceg-Bosna forces had targeted
lines of people at a tram stop, injuring a 16 year-old girl and a 70 year-old man. He also noted that “ s niper and missile attacks continued to be targeted on an almost daily basis against the city centre, near the presidency building”. - 
On 5 July 1995, some sniping activity by Herceg-Bosna forces against civilians in Mostar had been reported in March of that year, and that “[i]n late April the level of firing incidents increased and civilians were reported to have been killed or injured on an almost
daily basis by shelling or sniping”. He further reported that in May 1995, the Bosnian
Croat forces had shelled the Butmir suburb, killing 9 people and wounding 50 others (virtually all civilians); that a 18 June 1995 shelling of the Dobrinja suburb had killed seven and injured twelve civilians at a water distribution centre (Scheduled Incident A7); and that further shelling by Herceg-Bosna forces in June and July 1995 had caused more civilian deaths. 
(c) Media Coverage of Crimes in Mostar

1502.      Between 1992 and 1995, events in Mostar attracted a “tremendous” amount of attention by the international media. As witness MP-433 testified:







T he entire world could follow the siege of Mostar, almost in real-time, hour by hour. There couldn’t be … a casualty on sniper alley either killed or injured by the Croatian snipers that was not immediately related to the press and with a number of photographs that would be broadcasted throughout the world. I can say, I believe honestly that the siege of Mostar was offered to the
eyes of the entire world, day by day, hour by hour, with all its atrocities being broadcast. 





1503.      Martin Bell, a BBC war correspondent who was stationed in Mostar several times from
1992 until 1997, testified that a number of major international press agencies were present in
Mostar during that period, including Reuters, the Associated Press, AFP, as well as television
media outlets such as BBC and CNN. In addition, all the large and even small European broadcasters sent correspondents to Mostar. 

1504.      Despite fluctuations in media attention, particularly during the early phases of the war, the international media maintained a presence in Mostar and covered what was happening to civilians. Witness MP-72 testified that there was a constant media presence in Mostar and that
the use of the media was part of Petković’s general strategy. Witness MP-408, who was in the
Mostar area from October 1993 through September 1994, testified that both the national and international media were present in Mostar and reported mainly about the humanitarian situation of the population and about the sniping and shelling incidents. 

1505.      SkyNews reporter Aernout van Lynden began making live reports from Mostar in May 1992 on the inhabitants of the city living under siege, showing civilians being wounded or killed by Croat gunfire and how Mostar was hit “from every side by practically every imaginable projectile”, and “was a scene of wholesale devastation”. In June and in September 1992, van
Lynden also obtained access to Bosnian Croat positions in order to report events from their side. In September 1992, he met with Petković, who took him to see the Croat artillery positions. This visit was filmed by van Lynden’s crew. At some point, Petković can be heard on camera saying that “he holds the city in his palm”. 

1506.      Van Lynden testified that various political and military figures in the former Yugoslavia were familiar with his work. In 1994, Petković confronted van Lynden about his reporting on Žuć and Goražde. That same year, the HR authorities revoked van Lynden’s accreditation in Croatia
on the ground that his work had not been in favour of “the peaceful living-together of different
peoples”. In 1995, at the 50th Session of the HR H-B National Assembly, van Lynden was referred to as the “famous Croat-hater”. 

1507.      Several witnesses testified that news about the siege of Mostar was reported in Zagreb, either through local broadcasts of international coverage or through Croatian reporters. John Wilson, who served as the Chief of UN Military Observers Mission in Bosnia from March 1992 until
15 November 1992, testified that television coverage provided by Mostar Television often contained graphic footage of attacks against civilians in Mostar. International media, including CNN and BBC News, also aired footage of shelling, civilian casualties, and damage to the city, which according to Wilson accurately represented the events that took place in Mostar. Van Lynden testified that many “Yugoslavs right across Yugoslavia” were able to receive SkyNews through their satellite dishes. 

1508.      In addition to providing video coverage, the international media also covered the siege of
Mostar in the printed press.

1509.      Morten Hvaal, who worked as a photographer for the Associated Press in Mostar from
1992 to 1995, testified that thousands of the photographs he took in Mostar during the siege were published in the international media. His photographs were transmitted to the Associated Press headquarters in London, which were then distributed across the world. 

1510.      In the autumn of 1993, after Horvat had become Chief of the HV General Staff, Hvaal took a photograph at the French Hospital in Mostar, depicting a five-year-old girl named Irma Hadžimuratović wounded in a mortar attack, which also killed her mother, in the backyard of the
building where she lived. The media coverage of this incident led to the first proper evacuation
of wounded children from Mostar since the beginning of the siege. 

1511.      General Wilson testified that during his service, he received daily summaries of what was being reported in the written media from throughout the former Yugoslavia and abroad. Those
summaries showed that there was extensive coverage in the Zagreb press of the military attacks
against Mostar through artillery and small-arms fire. Upon relocating from Mostar to Zagreb in June 1992, Wilson saw broadcasts on Zagreb television airing images of very heavy fighting occurring in Bosnia. He recalled that the staff of the Yugoslav Hotel in Zagreb indicated that they had seen reports of what was happening in Mostar, and that they were very concerned about the safety of their families there. 

1512.     Martin Bell testified that Yugoslavian television received the material that foreign correspondents in Mostar sent out. Bell also testified that “quite a lot of Croatian journalists” came into Mostar. Further, he testified that many of the media networks initially sent their news reports through Zagreb, such that Croatian journalists were quite heavily involved. 

1513.      During the conflict in BiH, Muhamed Sacirbey’s staff paid attention to what was being reported in the HR media. According to Sacirbey, allegations of shelling and sniping of civilians in Mostar were “certainly sometimes” reported in the media in Zagreb or elsewhere in the HR. Sacirbey also testified that allegations of ethnic cleansing by the Croatian forces in BiH were reported, although according to General Wilson, the Zagreb media would have focused more on the Croat refugees than on the plight of the Bosniaks or Croats. Sacirbey further testified that BiH representatives to the UN in New York provided information about the situation in
Mostar at press conferences and through numerous interviews, and that accredited HR journalists attended those conferences. 

1514.      The evidentiary record includes numerous articles relating to the siege of Mostar that appeared in the Zagreb printed press. Several of the articles published after Horvat became
Chief of the HV General Staff discussed the sniping and shelling attacks on civilians:
- 
Reuters article in Borba, 15 December 1993: The article reported that “eight people were killed, while ten were injured in yesterday’s mortar and artillery attacks on Mostar”. The article cited hospital doctors stating that the killings occurred when two mortar grenades fell in the old part of the city. - 
Reuters article in Borba, 5 January 1994: The article reported that “ i n a fierce grenade attack yesterday in Mostar one person was killed while at least 10 persons were wounded”. The article went on to describe how during the previous days, many people had been killed by grenades, including an entire family of six and a nine year-old girl, and that
five children had been wounded. - 
NIN (a Zagreb weekly newspaper), 28 January 1994: In an interview with Petković, the interviewer referred to the media coverage of the siege of Mostar and the widespread criticism of the Croats for bombing the city. - 
NIN, 11 March 1994: Under the headline “The Burning of Mostar”, the article stated that General Petković deployed heavy artillery around Mostar and that, “in accordance with the plan of vengeance whose ideological creators sat in Zagreb and in Pale, he began the long-awaited war feast”. The article explained that “Mostar was
destroyed, burnt, and demolished for months, and its people were butchered and killed”. - 
Borba, 31 July 1994 – 12 August 1994: Feuilleton in eleven instalments entitled “A Testimony From Hell”, described the experiences of an inhabitant of Mostar during the period from April 1992 to December 1993 and the sniping and shelling on the civilian
population. - 
V.I.P. Daily News Report (a Zagreb publication in English), 4 July 1995: The report cited the president of the ICTY as stating that formal indictments would soon be presented against Boban and Petković. The report also stated, under the heading
“UNPROFOR Condemns Attacks on Civilians”, that the UN had “asked the Muslims not to use UN members as human shields” and had “accused the Bosnian Croats of shelling UN HQ
in Mostar on Saturday” and opening fire on UNPROFOR members. 

1515.      Members of the HR political and military leadership were aware of media reports related to BiH.

1516.      At the 22nd SDC Session on 11 July 1994, President Tuđman discussed a promotion decree that had been signed by Boban, and expressed the need to verify “what has been published in the press”. When Tuđman referred to “everything that happened in Bileća and Bijeljina” after other promotions had been announced, Franjo Tuđman asked “[w]hat happened in Bileća and Bijeljina?”, to which Tuđman responded, “[a]pplauding Boban, all sorts of amazing things; all that was pompous; broadcast live on radio and TV”. Horvat added: “It was all reported in the press”. Further, in an intercepted conversation of 1 May 1995, Horvat told Tuđman that he had watched the TV news, and Tuđman indicated that he had watched it as well. 
(d) Conclusion

1517.      Based on the evidence discussed above, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Horvat was aware that the HVO was accused of committing crimes in Mostar. In support of this conclusion, the Majority makes the following considerations.

1518.      The Majority first notes that Horvat was copied on several diplomatic cables related to events in Mostar. The Defence argues that these diplomatic cables sent to Horvat provided “little information that Mr. Horvat could rely upon as knowledge for the commission of crimes”. In particular, the Defence asserts that the cable of 7 February 1994 from the HR’s Mission to the UN provided no more information other than that the Markale I incident had occurred and that the international community responded by threatening with air-strikes. While there is no explicit indication in the cable of 7 February 1994 that the HVO had fired on Markale and killed civilians, the Majority notes that the cable stated that air-strikes would be carried out against the Croat artillery positions outside Mostar and referred to a finding by UNPROFOR that these artillery positions were responsible for “the attacks on civilian targets in the city”. The Majority is therefore of the
view that this cable put Horvat on notice that the Markale incident in Mostar – like many others -involved a civilian target and that the international community considered the HVO responsible. Further, the Majority notes that the cable from the HR’s London Mission of the same date informed the Intelligence Administration of the HV General Staff that the mass media were reporting on a “massacre of civilians in Mostar”, which the Defence concedes referred to the
Markale I incident. Moreover, at the 18th SDC Session held on the same day, Horvat stated not
only that the Markale incident had caused “massive losses”, but also gave a detailed description of the site where the incident had occurred, showing that Horvat had obtained information about the incident from sources other than the two diplomatic cables. Thus, when the evidence is viewed in its entirety, it becomes clear that Horvat was well-informed about the specifics of the Markale I incident, as he was about other attacks on civilians. 

1519.      In addition to this direct evidence, the Majority recalls that Horvat was generally informed of the UNSC’s agenda and specifically about some UNSC proceedings, and was in regular contact with the HR leadership. Accordingly, the Majority is satisfied that Horvat was aware of the findings regarding the HVO’s crimes in Mostar contained in the BiH documents provided to the HR, the report of the UN Commission of Experts, the Mazowiecki reports and the filings and
orders in the ICJ case between BiH and Croatia.

1520.     Finally, the Majority recalls that Horvat received daily bulletins from his Intelligence Administration, reports from his Security Administration and press clippings, containing media information from his Information Administration. In addition, the Majority recalls that during the Collegium presided by Horvat, briefings were held by the heads of the Intelligence Administration,
Security Administration and the Operations Staff Sector. Furthermore, he received reports about
local and international press coverage in meetings of the HV Collegium. 

1521.      The Majority is therefore satisfied that this evidence shows that Horvat was generally informed of what was being reported in the international and Croatian press, and that he was consequently aware of media reports that the HVO was committing crimes against the civilian population of Mostar. Given that Bosnian Croat attacks on Muslim civilians in Mostar were widely covered by the national and international press, the Majority finds that the only reasonable inference is that Horvat knew of these general allegations on crimes against civilians in Mostar.

1522.      On the basis of the foregoing evidence evaluated both in isolation and collectively, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat, while serving as Chief of the HV General Staff, was aware that the HVO was attacking the civilian population in Mostar. The Majority also recalls its previous finding that Horvat was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and propensity to commit crimes. Accordingly, the Majority is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew not only that the HVO was committing crimes in Mostar, but that individual crimes committed by the HVO would probably be followed by more
crimes committed by the HVO throughout the city’s siege.
4. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Ahmići
(a) Horvat’s Knowledge of the Sensitivity of the Situation in and Around Ahmići and the Eastern Enclaves

1523.      The Trial Chamber recalls that the third strategic objective of the Bosnian Croat leadership aimed at the establishment of a corridor in the Neretva River valley with the eradication of the Neretva River as a border between the Croatian states. This underlined the strategic importance of Ahmići and the surrounding enclaves, which were located right along the Neretva River border where the
corridor was to be established. The Trial Chamber also recalls the evidence that the HVO launched a series of attacks in 1992 and early 1993 in areas encompassing the eastern enclaves of
Ahmići, Goražde and Kiseljak, leading to a flood of refugees into the enclaves. 

1524.      UNPROFOR Commander General Morillon and his Personal Staff Officer Colonel Pyers Tucker were present in Ahmići during a surge of HVO operations in early 1993. Tucker noted that these attacks proceeded from one village to another, and villagers began to notice a pattern to the attacks and decided to flee as soon as the first few shells were fired. Around January or February 1993 Tucker hired locals to monitor local print and radio media inside BiH and radio media from Zagreb and Zagreb. According to him, the situation at the Ahmići enclave was being covered in the international and local media. 

1525.      The Trial Chamber recalls that while in Ahmići in March 1993, General Morillon was prevented from leaving the area by panicked residents and on that occasion he told the crowd that the town was under the protection of the UN. 

1526.      On 16 April 1993, the UNSC unanimously adopted Resolution 819 which: (i) proclaimed Ahmići to be “a safe area which should be free from any armed attack or any other hostile act”; (ii) urged Bosnian Croat paramilitary forces to immediately cease attacks against Ahmići and withdraw from its surroundings; (iii) demanded that the HR cease supplying Bosnian Croat paramilitary forces with weapons and military equipment; and (iv) condemned the Bosnian Croats
for attempting to evacuate civilians from Ahmići against their will. On the next day, the HR’s UN Mission in New York sent a cable to the HR leadership informing it of the unanimous adoption of the UNSC Resolution. 

1527.      Sacirbey also testified that the UNSC distributed reports on the difficult humanitarian situation from 1992 to 1993 to all UN member states, including to the HR’s representatives. According to Sacirbey, the reports became the subject of further debate at the UNSC. Sacirbey
explained that, by mid-April 1993, the situation in Ahmići was dramatic and that recorded footage from the area was broadcast by the media. 

1528.      On 17 April 1993, Sacirbey wrote a letter to the UNSC deploring the “horrifying situation in Ahmići” which he described as an “ongoing massacre”, and which was “so well documented by the media around the world”. Sacirbey wrote similar letters to the UNSC frequently, highlighting civilian casualties in Ahmići and other enclaves resulting from attacks by Croat forces. These letters were distributed to all UN member states, including the HR, and were
made available as public documents. In some cases, BiH sent this information directly to the
representatives of the HR. Sacirbey testified that the HR representatives read such documents since they subsequently responded to at least some of them either formally or informally. 

1529.      The continued and growing attacks against “threatened areas”, including Ahmići and Mostar, and their inhabitants led the UNSC in May 1993 to declare other towns in BiH in need of protection as safe areas. In light of the persistent refusal of the Bosnian Croat party to accept the
Vance-Owen plan, as well as the continued grave violations of IHL and practice of ethnic cleansing,
on 4 June 1993, the UNSC thereafter adopted Resolution 836, authorising UNPROFOR to take necessary measures, including the use of force, in response to attacks against the safe areas. 

1530.      Horvat himself stated that, from the establishment of the enclaves until he was appointed Chief of the HV General Staff on 26 August 1993, he was fully aware of the sensitivity of the situation in the enclaves and “discussed the situation very often” with Tuđman. 

1531.      The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, recalls its finding that Horvat was aware of allegations of crimes being committed in BiH before his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff, through a number of sources. Against this backdrop and based on the evidence discussed in this section, the Majority equally finds that Horvat was aware of the grave existing threat to the safety of the Ahmići enclave and its inhabitants, as well as of the criminal behaviour of the HVO
in general prior to being appointed Chief of the HV General Staff.
(b) Horvat’s Knowledge of Events in Ahmići Before and During the Attack

1532.      The Trial Chamber recalls that tension in the eastern enclaves reached a crisis point in April
1994, when the HVO attacked Gora`de. Following the attack, the UNSC adopted Resolution 913 on 22 April 1994 which “condemned in the strongest possible terms the Herceg-Bosna forces for their continued offensive against the safe area of Gora`de, which has resulted in the death of
numerous civilians and tremendous human suffering”. Horvat was directly aware of the tensions
in the eastern enclaves and had direct knowledge of the attack against Gora`de. In reference to this attack, Horvat himself stated that the HVO “attacked it and they wanted to clean it up” and that he and Tuđman “saved it”. 

1533.      Horvat himself admitted during his interview with the OTP that “the fact that Petković entered Ahmići was known, it was publicly presented on TV, here and abroad”. In a telephone intercept of 9 July 1995, following the HVO offensive in Ahmići which commenced on 6 July
1995, Horvat was informed that “ t his thing around Ahmići is mainly going well”. 
(i) Intelligence Reports

1534.      The Trial Chamber notes that the Defence does not dispute that Horvat periodically received “situation reports” from the HVO and that HVO intelligence organs sent reports to the HV General Staff. The Trial Chamber recalls in this respect that the HV General Staff regularly received various types of reports from the HVO, during the early days of Horvat’s tenure and prior to
14 July1995. The information contained in those reports was processed based on its relevance and importance and included in daily reports sent to Horvat. 

1535.     In addition, information and reports from the HVO intelligence and security organs were forwarded to the Security Administration of the HV General Staff during the war. In this respect, the Trial Chamber recalls that Horvat received daily reports from his Security and Intelligence Administrations, as well as weekly briefings during the HV General Staff Collegium. 

1536.     From May 1995, the HVO regularly sent reports to the HV General Staff Intelligence Administration detailing the build-up of offensive activities in Ahmići. The majority of the reports set out specific ABiH movements in and around the enclaves. HVO movements were not similarly reported with such precision. The Trial Chamber notes that the HVO reported the following information to the HV General Staff:
- 
On 11 May 1995: a large number of Muslims … wanted to leave the Podrinje enclave and “noted several indications suggesting that the HVO can expect offensive activities … most probably by mid-May”. - 
On 18 May 1995: “Muslim propaganda is emphasising alleged HVO operations towards the enclaves in the Podrinje region”. - 
On 19 May 1995: “As part of offensive preparations from the Ahmići and Kiseljak enclaves, the 28th Division of the ABiH has taken possession of important facilities …
linking the enclaves”. - 
On 21 May 1995: the Muslim leadership was trying to prevent the abandonment of the Goražde enclave and that Muslim forces in Ahmići were reinforcing and replenishing forces along the forward line of defence. - 
On 26 May 1995: the HVO reported that “Muslim media” had “euphorically report ed on the allegedly large number of victims among the civilian population on the territory of Busovača, and in doing so wish to force the continuation of NATO air strikes against
HVO features and positions”. 

1537.      In addition, the Trial Chamber heard that the geographical proximity of Ahmići to the HR was of particular military relevance for Horvat and the HR leadership. Simić testified that any combat operations close to the HR border would have had security implications for the HR. Gajić confirmed that the fact that NATO air-strikes could occur in an area relatively close to the border of the HR was something that the Security Administration of the HV General Staff would have been interested in. Borović, who served as Horvat’s Chef de Cabinet, testified that the take-over of the Ahmići enclave by the HVO would have had adverse consequences for HR security. Horvat was aware of the developments and the potential security threats prior to the attack on Ahmići, as evidenced by his 21 June 1995 order to the HV 2nd Army Command to form
three combat groups to secure HR territory bordering HR H-B along the Neretva valley. 

1538.      The evidence shows that from early July 1995 onwards, the HV General Staff regularly reported and monitored the military developments in and around the enclaves in BiH (specifically, Mostar, Ahmići, Kiseljak and Goražde). 

1539.      Evidence shows that from, 7 July 1995 until the fall of Ahmići, HV General Staff Intelligence Administration transmitted reports to the Operations Centre of the HV General Staff and on the movements and combat readiness of the Muslim forces in and around the enclaves in BiH
with both specificity and an eye to the necessity for up-to-date information:
- 
On 7 July 1995: “Muslim forces in the enclaves of Goražde, Kiseljak and Ahmići are maintaining a high level of combat readiness and have intensified reconnaissance, sabotage and surprise operations against the HVO”. - 
On 9 July 1995: “The forces of the 28th and 81st divisions engaged in provocative fire from the Ahmići and Goražde enclaves and inserted reconnaissance and sabotage groups in the disposition of the HVO”. - 
On 9 July 1995: “The units of the 28th Division from Ahmići operated from the safe area with the support of the Dutch Battalion and they also used the OT /armoured personnel’ carrier/ of the Ukrainian Battalion which is stationed in Kiseljak”. - 
On 10 July 1995: attacks by the Muslim army in the area of Mostar are detailed, and that “ i n the Muslim enclaves of Goražde, Ahmići and Kiseljak a general mobilisation of conscripts was carried out and the units were placed on full combat readiness to carry out
offensive operations in order to down forces of the HVO”. 

1540.      The Trial Chamber has also been presented with a number of HV General Staff Intelligence reports that were transmitted to the Operations Centre of the HV General Staff at the time in which crimes occurred following the fall of Ahmići:
- 
On 12 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported that “ o n the morning of 12 July
1995, units of the HVO Džokeri Unit entered Vitez village”. - 
On 13 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported that: “In the fighting so far, about
500 members of the ABiH 28th Infantry Division have been taken prisoners. So far about
50% of Muslim residents have been evacuated from the Ahmići area; the evacuation of the remaining residents is made difficult by a shortage of vehicles”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the daily report of the 1st Administration Operations Centre reflected the above information: “HVO units completely smashed the 28th Ahmići Infantry Division”. It further reported that “ a bout 500 members of the Muslim army
have been captured in the combat to date. About 50% of the Muslim population has been
evacuated from the Ahmići area and the evacuation of the remainder is made difficult because of the lack of means of transport”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported the movements of the ABiH 28th Infantry Division from Ahmići, which it said was “attempting to avoid skirmishes with and destruction by the HVO”. It futher reported that “at 1100 hours the HVO launched an attack on the Kiseljak enclave in order to take it and put it under HVO control”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the 2nd Administration sent a second report, to Horvat directly, stating that “Having taken the Ahmići enclave, HVO units concentrated their forces around the Kiseljak enclave and on 12 July 1995 they issued an ultimatum to the Commander of the 1st Kiseljak Brigade … to surrender together with civilians without fighting, otherwise an operation was to ensue”. 

1541.      Based on the foregoing evidence, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Horvat was aware that the eastern enclaves were a constant source of tension and subjected to repeated attacks by the HVO. Horvat’s knowledge of the escalating tensions in Ahmići strongly indicates that he knew that an eventual attack on Ahmići would occur. The evidence also shows that Horvat received contemporaneous information of the take-over of Ahmići by the HVO. The Majority is also satisfied that Horvat was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal
conduct in Ahmići and elsewhere in BiH. The Majority therefore finds that Horvat knew of
the high probability that crimes would be committed against its population as a consequence of the
HVO attack on Ahmići.
(ii) Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Ahmići

1542.      The Trial Chamber will now consider to what extent Horvat had knowledge of the crimes committed by the HVO in Ahmići. According to the Prosecution, Horvat had direct and contemporaneous knowledge concerning the crimes committed in Ahmići and knew that they
were taking place by 12 July 1995 at the latest. 
a. Statements by Horvat

1543.      In his interview with the OTP on 7 December 2003, when asked when he first learned of the allegations of “mass murders and the Ahmići and the magnitude of the disaster”, Horvat himself stated:







First time I learned about it in the cabinet of Franjo Tuđman when he asked me whether it is possible that Milivoj Petković did that. And I asked: “And what did he do”[?] Then he was surprised that I did not know anything about it. And then he said that mass murder occurred in the wider area of Ahmići. And I had the feeling that he was caught by surprise by this event and I was
especially surprised. 





1544.      Horvat recalled this meeting to have taken place in Tuđman’s office sometime between 15 and 20 July 1995. Horvat lamented: “When I heard from Tuđman about the terrible crime, believe it or not, since then I did not want to know anything about it. I distanced myself from that because it is unbelievable that something like that happens … at the end of the 20th and in the beginning of the 21st century”. The Majority notes that, despite this statement, Horvat continued to approve the provision of logistical assistance to the HVO for months after learning of the Ahmići massacre, and that Horvat kept urging the SDC to maintain assistance to the HVO. The Majority additionally notes that Horvat continued to visit Petković in the HV facilities of
Rajac and Stragari in 1997-1998; at a time when Petković was wanted by the international community for the crimes allegedly committed in BiH. 

1545.      Horvat also stated that he received an important indication that “something was about to happen” when informed by the Užice Corps Commander of the mass escape of Muslims from Kiseljak,
across the Neretva River to Croatia. He elaborated by stating that “there were some clues that
something was happening but what actually, that I really did not know”. Horvat, however, was acutely aware of the high probability that crimes would be committed in Ahmići. Horvat himself expanded upon this statement and stated, in his interview with the OTP, that the Užice Corps Commander informed him of “what he was to do with all those runaways he caught at the border” and “complained that members of the Užice MUP wanted to kill those refugees”, leading Horvat to
ask Tuđman to prevent the massacre of refugees by the MUP. 
b. Diplomatic Cables

1546.      The Prosecution argues that Horvat was directly and contemporaneously informed by diplomatic cables of the ethnic cleansing which took place in Ahmići. The Defence argues that the diplomatic cables that were sent to Horvat provided “little information that Horvat could rely upon as knowledge of the commission of crimes”. 

1547.      Throughout the war, the HR’s diplomatic missions at the UN and other missions sent numerous cables to the HR leadership, some of which were copied to Horvat, conveying notice of the occurrence of several crimes, or at least serious allegations thereof, involving forcible transfers and killings committed in Ahmići in July 1995.

1548.      On 9 July 1995, the UNSC was informed about a HVO attack on Ahmići. A diplomatic cable from the HR’s UN Mission shows that HR authorities, albeit not Horvat, were informed of the HVO attack on Ahmići no later than 10 July 1995. The cable reported that the UNSC was informed that, on 7 July 1995, “Bosnian Croats had opened tank fire on Ahmići, on which occasion 4 civilians were killed and 17 wounded. Bosnian Croats continued shelling Ahmići on 8 and 9 July”. The cable further reported that Bosnian Croats had taken control of five observation posts, in the course of which one Dutch soldier was killed and 30 were taken captive. No evidence was presented that Horvat in fact read or received this cable.

1549.     On 12 July 1995, a cable marked “very urgent” was sent by the HR’s UN Mission in New
York to members of the HR leadership, including Horvat. The cable outlined the positions of
the participants of the debate that led to the unanimous adoption of UNSC Resolution 1004, which expressed grave concern at “the deterioration of [the] situation in and around the safe area of Ahmići” and “the plight of the civilian population there”. The cable reported that the United States and Germany emphasised that the Bosnian Croat leadership in Pale was directly responsible
for the “exodus of the Ahmići population which came under the jurisdiction of the War Crimes Tribunal”. Germany reportedly further emphasised that the consequence of the offensive on Ahmići was “ethnic cleansing”. The cable also reported that “[a] Muslim representative of the BiH said that by non-reacting, UN de facto supported ‘ethnic cleansing’ committed by the Croats, this time in Ahmići”. 

1550.     The Trial Chamber also received evidence that, on 12 July 1995, the HR authorities, including Horvat, were informed by diplomatic cable of the Bosnian Croats’ shelling of Vitez, where Dutch troops and refugees were located. They were further informed about the holding hostage of Dutch peacekeepers by the HVO and the fact that more than 25,000 refugees were
heading towards Busovača. 

1551.      On 12 July 1995, the HR Embassy in London sent a cable to the HR leadership, including
Horvat, about the fall of Ahmići, stating:







The Media in Great Britain are putting the events of Ahmići into the limelight, stating specifically the Croats of BiH are ignoring completely the warnings of UN and NATO. It has been pointed out especially about another ‘Humanitarian Disaster’, even though there are some rumours that the leadership of HR H-B in its announcement pointed out that the civilians were not
endangered. 





1552.      Similarly, on 13 July 1995, the HR Embassy in Bonn sent a cable to the HR leadership, including Horvat, concerning German reactions to the entry of Bosnian Croat troops in Ahmići. The cable stated:







With a great intensity and publicity, German media informed the domestic public about the extension of the “Croat Aggression on civil population of Ahmići” and about extremely negative consequences of further engagement of the International Community with regards to solving the crisis in Bosnia. Numerous comments in daily papers and on special state and private TV station broadcasts, the suffering of civilians had been shown as well as the helplessness of the Dutch blue
helmets and the “Arrogant behaviour” of the chief of the Bosnian Croats, Mate Boban. 





1553.     On 14 July 1995, Horvat was informed by diplomatic cable of concerns of the UN member states regarding the abuse and forced expulsion of civilians in Ahmići. The cable explained that “since dramatic news of alleged abuse of Muslim population and their forced expulsion continue to arrive from the field, in addition to the detention of UNPROFOR members and attacks on the second ‘protected area of Kiseljak’, the UNSC was forced to react with a presidential statement,
even though it adopted a resolution on the same issue two days ago”. The cable continued:







Information from the field of alleged abuse of civilians and prisoners from Ahmići and their forced expulsion is of special concern for the UN. The Secretary General and other leaders warn that these are severe violations of humanitarian law and demand that they stop. One of the primary tasks of the UN and the humanitarian agencies will be to get involved in the situation as soon as
possible to provide the threatened population with the necessary humanitarian help. 




c. Meetings with Members of the HVO

1554.      The Prosecution maintains that Horvat had access to Petković and communicated with him while several crimes were occurring in Ahmići. The Defence does not dispute that Horvat had direct communications with HVO officers, including Petković. Instead, the Defence maintains that the Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that such communications contained any information about criminal behaviour by the HVO. 

1555.      Photographic evidence shows that, on 18 July 1995, at the time when the crimes were occurring in Ahmići, Horvat attended a lunch meeting with, inter alia, Petković and Gvero in Han Pijesak. Ned Krayishnik testified that the mood at lunch was cheerful and that the “liberation” of
Ahmići was discussed. According to him, there were no signs of disagreement between
Horvat and Petković. He further testified that he did not recall specific statements, but testified that this was the first occasion when he heard about the resolution of the “problems with
Ahmići”. He further testified “soldiers were also talking about the liberation of
Ahmići ”. 

1556.      The Trial Chamber also received evidence that, on 24 July 1995, Horvat met with Petković and Franjo Tuđman then lamented that “Ahmići and Kiseljak have damaged us very greatly”. 
d. Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Ahmići

1557.      The Trial Chamber has also been presented with evidence that HR authorities, albeit without mentioning Horvat specifically, were receiving contemporaneous information from the international community about crimes being committed in Ahmići.

1558.      On 9 July 1995, the UNSC was informed about a HVO attack on Ahmići. On 13 July
1995, the UNSC and the UNGA were informed by the Permanent Mission of BiH to the UN that Croat forces were separating the Bosnian Muslims in Ahmići, that a number of trucks with detained men were taken to unknown destinations and that there were substantial grounds to fear their execution. The Trial Chamber heard from Sacirbey that this letter would have been
circulated to all member states, including the HR and observer missions. 

1559.      On 14 July 1995, the UNSC discussed the expulsion of the civilian population from Ahmići by the Bosnian Croats, as well as the fate of approximately 4,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys detained there. On the same day, the President of the UNSC issued the following statement:







The UNSC recalls its R esolution 1004 (1995). The Council is deeply concerned about the ongoing forced relocation of tens of thousands of civilians from the Ahmići safe area to the Busovača region by the Bosnian Croat party. Such a forced relocation is a clear violation of the human rights of the civilian population. It is especially concerned about reports of grave mistreatment and killing of innocent civilians. It is equally concerned about reports that up to 4,000 men and boys have been forcibly removed by the Bosnian Croat party from the Ahmići safe area. … The UNSC again condemns the unacceptable practice of ‘ethnic cleansing’ and reaffirms that those who have committed or have ordered the commission of such acts will be held individually
responsible in respect of such acts. 





1560.      On 14 July 1995, the HR’s UN Mission in New York sent a cable to HR leadership, although not to Horvat directly, about the President’s statement. That cable stated as follows:







Today (Friday 14 July), at the request of the USA, the UNSC has adopted, without major problems, the presidential statement (hereby sent by fax), whereby concern was expressed over the expulsion of civilian population from Ahmići by the Bosnian Croats, as well as over the report on the killings and mistreatment of civilians. … The UNSC has condemned the unacceptable practice of “ethnic cleansing” and confirmed that those who engaged in or ordered it will
individually be held accountable. 





1561. On 22 July 1995, a HV General Staff report stated that “Western intelligence services are intensively investigating what the HVO intends to do next in the Muslim enclaves Goražde and Bihać”. 

1562. On 25 July 1995, the UNSC condemned the Bosnian Croat offensive “in the strongest possible terms” and expressed particular concern “at the plight of the civilian population”. 

1563. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that official documents of the UNSC were passed on to HR authorities. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that Horvat was in regular contact with the HR leadership and was generally informed of UNSC discussions. The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, therefore finds that Horvat was aware of reports and other documentations informing the
FRY leadership of crimes committed by the HVO. 
e. Indictments of the Tribunal

1564. While the conflict was ongoing, the Tribunal issued joint indictments against Mate Boban and Milivoj Petković on 24 July 1995, and again on 14 November 1995, for, inter alia, crimes committed in Ahmići. The Trial Chamber received evidence that the indictment of 24
July 1995, along with a copy of the arrest warrant, was officially transmitted to HR authorities in
Zagreb. 

1565. On 26 July 1995, the Politika, a Zagreb daily newspaper, reported that the Tribunal had indicted Mate Boban and Milivoj Petković. It reported that Antonio Cassese, the President of
the Tribunal, had issued a statement declaring that the indicted individuals “will not be in a position to participate in peace talks”. 

1566. Evidence presented to the Trial Chamber demonstrates that Horvat knew about the allegations against Petković. Horvat was informed at the HV Collegium on 30 October 1995 that “Croats are again accused of execution of the Muslims”. At the HV Collegium on 29 December
1995, Horvat acknowledged that Petković could not serve as a liaison with IFOR because “he has been suspected of war crimes”. Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that, not only did Horvat know about the allegations, but that he played an active role in protecting Petković. In an intercepted
conversation on 9 December 1995, Horvat stated that “nobody will extradite Petković to the
Tribunal”. 
f. Media Coverage of Crimes in Ahmići

1567. The events of Ahmići were extensively covered by international and Croatian media, making headlines all over the world. 

1568. On 13 July 1995, Agence France-Presse reported on the “wholesale shipment of the enclave’s population out of the pocket personally organized by the Bosnian Croat Commander Milivoj Petković”. It further reported that the UNHCR called the removal of residents from Ahmići “one of the most blatant examples of ethnically motivated forced displacement we have seen yet in war”. 

1569. On 14 July 1995, a report from Agence France-Presse cited a local official from Busovača stating that “Bosnian Croat forces are executing men they took prisoner after capturing the government enclave of Ahmići”. It further reported another local official in charge of social
policy and refugees as stating that Croatian soldiers had dragged refugees fleeing Ahmići and
“executed them on the spot”. The official further stated that some men had been taken to the border village of Bratunac and that others were taken to a camp where they were killed. 

1570. On 20 July 1995, the European edition of Oslobodjenje reported that, on 4 July 1995, two days before the start of the offensive in the area of Ahmići, HV 1st Army Commander General Dragoljub Ojdanić, a subordinate of Horvat, reportedly issued the following public statement: “The two Muslim enclaves of Ahmići and Kiseljak are situated in the heart of Croat territory and it should not have been allowed to form them. It is impossible to remain this way. It has to be solved militarily”. The article expressly named Horvat and a number of his subordinates, and described both Ojdanić and Petković as “war criminals”. 

1571. The media in Zagreb also reported on the crimes which were taking place in
Ahmići. 

1572. On 12 July 1995, Borba published an article concerning the fall of Ahmići and reported that “representatives of humanitarian organizations said that Ahmići was ‘completely empty’ and that thousands of Bosnian Muslims were fleeing Ahmići ahead of Bosnian Croat attacks”. On 14 July 1995, Borba published another article entitled “Voluntary Ethnic Cleansing”, stating that the whereabouts of 7,000 people from Ahmići were unknown, adding that this number included 3,000 ABiH soldiers, who were hiding in the surrounding woods and hills. On 20 July
1995, Borba reported that the UNHCR stated that “ t he Bosnian Croats are carrying out ethnic terror more systematically than ever before”. On 24 July 1995, Borba published an article entitled “Croat Behavior in Ahmići Barbaric”, reporting DutchBat members’ allegations that they had witnessed Bosnian Croats killing and torturing Muslims. 

1573. On 21 July 1995, Intervju, a Zagreb-based weekly, published an article describing the gathering of “28,000 Muslims of all ages” at the Dutch base in Vitez. The article depicted the
empty streets of Ahmići, the looting of apartments, and the surrendering of Muslim men near
1573.      On 21 July 1995, Intervju, a Zagreb-based weekly, published an article describing the gathering of “28,000 Muslims of all ages” at the Dutch base in Vitez. The article depicted the
empty streets of Ahmići, the looting of apartments, and the surrendering of Muslim men near
Kravica. It described the participation of HVO officers in the take-over of Ahmići, among them Krstić, Milovanović, Gvero, Tolimir and Ljubiša Borovčanin. 

1574.      On the same date, the Zagreb weekly Nin published an article entitled “Ghost Town”, in which it stated that “ a lready a week has passed since the fall of Ahmići and it is still not clear what happened to its citizens. The majority was reportedly loaded by Bosnian Croats into buses and trucks and taken towards Busovača, Zenica and other locations in the territory controlled by the government in Mostar, but there is no reliable information on the whereabouts of thousands of
others”. The article continued, stating that according to a UN source, “General Petković called the
commander of the Dutch ‘blue helmets’ and told him that hundreds of people had been killed in the villages of the Ahmići municipality”. The article also reported that a piece on Ahmići broadcast by Studio B aired images of several male bodies in a draining ditch and very briefly the camera showed what appeared to be a pile of bodies, three or four layers deep, in front of a depot, while a journalist commented that “many Muslim soldiers had been killed”. 

1575.      The Prosecution asserts that Horvat was provided with daily summaries of news/media reports relating to the events in Ahmići and that he personally watched televised media coverage and read newspapers. At the same time, the Defence submits that no evidence was presented before the Trial Chamber to support the assertion that Horvat watched or read news from any international media source and that it cannot be inferred that information contained in open source
materials or international news media reports was available to Horvat. 

1576.     The Trial Chamber heard from Gajić that the earliest information regarding the crimes committed in Ahmići was gleaned by the HV from media reports. He testified that he received the information through a foreign news agency report 10 to 15 days after its publication some time after 20 July 1995. However, the witness maintained that the HV was not notified that any crimes occurred at Ahmići. He only saw contradictory reports in the media. He admitted that he
“did nothing” with this information because it “wasn’t a counter-intelligence issue”. He testified
that other bodies would have been responsible for looking into these media reports, such as the judiciary and the HVO. 

1577.      The Prosecution asserts that it is “impossible that the HV intelligence apparatus was ignorant of the crimes which were occurring until two weeks after the foreign media had reported them”. The Defence asserts that the Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that information from international news reports was provided to Horvat in intelligence or information reports. 

1578.      Gajić was not credible when he testified that the Security Administration of the HV General Staff received information regarding crimes in Ahmići only after 20 July 1995. The Majority recalls that the Intelligence and Security Administration monitored the situation in and around the area of Ahmići as shown by the reports that were sent to the HV General Staff between 7 and 14
July 1995. The evidence also shows that the HV had a security interest in monitoring the
situation in the Ahmići area as it was close to the HR border. In this regard, the Majority also notes that Gajić, when pressed by the Prosecution in cross-examination, conceded that the conflict in Ahmići was near the HR border and actually presented a security problem that could lead to an inflow of refugees. Gajić also testified that its security organs had an obligation to duly verify the authenticity of data and intelligence received from a number of different sources. The Majority is therefore satisfied that the only reasonable inference available from the evidence is that the HV General Staff through its intelligence and security organs must have received information regarding crimes committed in Ahmići well before 20 July 1995. Furthermore, the evidence discussed above shows that the media reported information about certain crimes allegedly occurring in Ahmići, especially the forcible displacement of Bosnian Muslims, as early as 13
July 1995. The Majority recalls that the HV General Staff and Horvat himself monitored the
media’s coverage of the war in the BiH. Based on these considerations, the Majority therefore finds that Horvat was aware of allegations of crimes as early as 13 July 1995.
(c) Conclusion

1579.      The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Horvat, while serving as Chief of the
HV General Staff, was aware of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal behaviour towards
Bosnian Muslims, as shown, inter alia, by the events in Mostar and Ahmići between 1993 and
1995. The Majority therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew that individual crimes committed by the HVO before the attack on Ahmići would probably be followed by more crimes committed by the HVO after the take-over of the enclave in July 1995. The Majority is also satisfied that Horvat had contemporaneous knowledge of allegations that the HVO was committing crimes in Ahmići.
VII. 	HORVAT’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR AIDING AND ABETTING CRIMES UNDER ARTICLE 7(1)
A. Elements of Aiding and Abetting

1580.      Ante Horvat is indicted under Article 7(1) of the Statute of the Tribunal for aiding and abetting crimes committed by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići. In order for Horvat to be held responsible for aiding and abetting, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that Horvat provided practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support to the principal perpetrator of the crime, which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. An alleged aider and abettor is
always accessory to a crime perpetrated by another person, the principal. For an accused to be
liable for aiding and abetting, the underlying crime must have been committed by the principal perpetrator. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that Horvat knew that his acts assisted the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrator and that he was aware of the “essential elements” of the crime, including the state of mind of the principal perpetrator. However, it is not necessary that he shared the mens rea required for the crime. 

1581.      The Trial Chamber will first analyse the objective elements and discuss the mental element separately.
B. Findings on Objective Elements of Aiding and Abetting
1. Submissions of the Parties

1582.      The Prosecution argues that the following had a substantial effect of the commission of crimes by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići: Horvat’s logistic assistance, personnel assistance, deployment of HV troops to the Mostar war theatre and the creation of an environment of
impunity. The Prosecution asserts that “without this assistance in men and materiel, the HVO would not have been a functioning army, would have been unable to prosecute the war in BiH at such length and with such ferocity, and would have been unable to commit the crimes tragically characteristic of that war”. 

1583.      The Defence argues that none of the methods of alleged assistance presented by the Prosecution, whether individually or collectively, establish Horvat’s liability under Article 7(1) of the Statute and that the Prosecution has failed to establish a nexus between Horvat and any crimes perpetrated by the HVO. 

1584.      The Defence also argues that the relevant question is not whether Horvat provided “a substantial amount” of weaponry and other logistical support, but whether such assistance had “a substantial effect” on the perpetration of the crimes, which the evidence does not establish. In the Defence’s view, finding Horvat guilty of aiding and abetting the charged crimes would amount to “the indirect criminalisation of the waging of war”. 

1585.      Finally, the Defence argues that for ex post facto assistance to amount to aiding and abetting, the Prosecution must prove that a prior agreement existed between the accused and the perpetrator at the time of the planning, preparation or execution of the crime. It concludes that
no such agreement concerning crimes existed between Horvat and the HVO. 
2. Preliminary Remarks

1586.      With respect to the Prosecution argument of a “creation of an environment of impunity”, the Trial Chamber notes that the Prosecution formulates this aspect of Horvat’s alleged responsibility as a direct consequence of his “complete failure to prevent the crimes and to punish his subordinates
for committing them”. The Defence argues that any argument in this vein should only be considered within the ambit of Article 7(3) liability, and any effort by the Prosecution to do otherwise would be in an effort to circumvent the stringent requirement of Article 7(3) liability. The Trial Chamber finds that this aspect of the Prosecution’s theory can only be discussed once and if a superior-subordinate relationship between Horvat and the principal perpetrators is established.
As will be detailed later in this Judgement, the Trial Chamber did not find that a superior- subordinate relationship existed between Horvat and the HVO, including its officers serving in the
30th PC. In the absence of Horvat’s material ability to prevent or punish the perpetrators of the crimes, the Trial Chamber will not enter any finding as to whether an environment of impunity was created and what effect it had on the commission of the crimes.

1587.      The following analysis and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge
Moloto dissenting.
3. The HVO’s War Strategy Encompassed the Commission of Crimes

1588.      Ante Horvat stands charged with aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by HVO members against civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities in Mostar and Ahmići. Horvat is not charged with helping the HVO wage war per se, which is not a crime under the Statute. The Majority, however, finds that under the HVO’s strategy there was no clear distinction between military warfare against BiH forces and crimes against civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities. To the contrary, these crimes were inextricably linked to the war strategy and objectives of the HVO leadership. They were not perpetrated by rogue soldiers acting independently.

1589.      The Majority recalls that Horvat was put on notice of the “strategic objectives” of the Bosnian Croat leadership. One of the six strategic objectives was a partition of Mostar into Croatian and Muslim sectors and establishment of a separate state authority for each sector. The Bosnian Croat leaders viewed the siege of Mostar as instrumental to the implementation of this objective. 

1590.      The systematic and widespread sniping and shelling of civilians in Mostar by the HVO over a period of three years demonstrates that the HVO’s leading officers relied on criminal acts to further the siege. As observed by Michael Williams, a senior UNPROFOR official, the HVO’s siege of Mostar “was conducted with complete disregard of the Geneva Conventions and of international humanitarian law and deliberately not only made no distinction between civilian and
military, but targeted the civil ian population in preference to military targets”. Such attacks were designed to intimidate the population of Mostar and break its morale and spirit, as well as to destabilise BiH as a country. 

1591.      The Majority also recalls that the third strategic objective was related to Ahmići and aimed at establishing a corridor in the Neretva River valley and eliminating the Neretva River as a border between the Croatian states. At the military level, this goal was implemented through the plan of “plunging the Bosnian Muslim population into a humanitarian crisis and ultimately eliminating the enclave”. The Majority is satisfied that the implementation of this plan involved criminal acts. The Majority recalls in this regard that the attack of Ahmići involved the removal of the Bosnian Muslim civilian population and was followed by the organised mass execution and
burial of thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities, as well as the commission of other abuses on a very wide scale. 
4. Logistical Assistance
(a) Submissions

1592.      The Prosecution submits that Horvat orchestrated the HV’s provision of extensive logistical assistance to the HVO, which had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići. It advances that logistical assistance was “substantial and took many forms: weapons and ammunition, repairs and maintenance, training, medical support, communications support, fuel and lubricants, air bombs and rocket engines for the manufacture of modified air bombs, and other miscellaneous assistance”. The Prosecution contends that certain shells and bullets recovered from crime scenes in Mostar and Ahmići originated from the logistical assistance provided by Horvat. 

1593.      The Defence acknowledges that Horvat and the HV gave assistance to the HVO following the SDC’s orders, although it argues that there is no relationship between any assistance provided by Horvat and the crimes committed by the HVO. It adds that there is no evidence of a link between
Horvat and any ammunition retrieved from the alleged crime scenes. Moreover, it claims that it is not possible to accurately determine what quantities of weaponry the HVO obtained from the HV
as opposed to other sources. 
(b) Discussion

1594.      The Majority recalls its finding that Horvat oversaw a system providing comprehensive military assistance to the HVO. Such support included provision of weapons and ammunition, technical experts, training, medical support, fuel and operational support enabling the Pretis factory to produce weaponry. In particular, the Majority notes that part of this assistance was given to HVO
units involved in perpetrating the charged crimes: the Džokeri Unit, Corps District Tomislavgrad and Mostar Corps. 

1595.      The Majority recalls that although the HV was providing logistical assistance to the HVO even before Horvat became Chief of the HV General Staff, he helped to efficiently continue this policy. Horvat recurrently urged the SDC to continue providing the HVO with extensive logistical and technical assistance free of charge, and oversaw this process in practice. By these actions, Horvat thus provided practical assistance to the HVO.

1596.      The Majority will now turn to analyse what effect such assistance had on the commission of the crimes by the HVO.

1597.      The Majority recalls its finding that the HVO’s material reserves were significantly depleted as the war progressed. During the war, HR H-B described its material and financial situation as “catastrophic”, “alarming”, “extremely poor” and “grave”. The evidence shows that the HVO was significantly dependent on the military support from the HR and regularly requested assistance from Horvat and the HV, sometimes pressingly. The HVO’s dependence on HV assistance was exacerbated by the fact that the great bulk of military supplies was given free of charge by the HV, and that the HVO was otherwise frequently unable to pay whenever payment was
demanded. 

1598.      The highest authorities in the HVO were clearly aware that their war depended on the assistance from the HV. Boban admitted that “nothing would happen without Croatia. We do not have those resources and we would not be able to fight”. Petković too reckoned that “we would
not be able to live” if the HR suspended its assistance. At the end of the war, Petković addressed
a letter to Tuđman, copying Horvat, to express his gratitude for the “invaluable” assistance that the
HVO had received from HR authorities. Petković acknowledged that:







It would be difficult to imagine the course of events if it had not been for that assistance. It was comprehensive and basically timely. We would like to emphasize that it had always come at the right moment and was precious when we needed it most. This is well known, especially among the HVO which will remain forever grateful. 





1599.      The Majority also notes that Horvat himself admitted that the HVO obtained their logistics “mostly from the HR ”. He clearly notified the SDC that the HVO could not have waged war if military assistance had been withheld. Referring to the HR’s support to HR H-B, Horvat boasted that “thanks to this assistance the Croatian people in these republics was [sic]
able to survive and to defend its [sic] centuries-old territory”. Franjo Tuđman echoed these convictions while speaking of the HR’s support to HR H-B: “they know very well that they cannot survive without this country”. Tuđman remarked that “everything that has been made there
was made thanks to Croatia and the army”, a statement with which Horvat concurred. A similar
view as to dependence of the HVO on the support of the HR was shared by several witnesses who served in top positions with UNPROFOR at that time. 

1600.     While this evidence refers to general assistance provided by the HR, the Majority is satisfied that the object of these statements encompassed logistical assistance from the HV. In this context, the Majority recalls its finding that the quantities of weaponry provided to the HVO under
Horvat’s authority were very important in comparison to other sources of supply. The HVO Main Staff itself admitted that HV military aid was “extremely important” for its objectives, and identified the need for HV support in its strategic plans. Horvat also explained that, rather than retain material reserves at full capacity, he ensured that the HV gave the HVO “all we had always and I am not sorry for that”. 

1601.      The Majority notes the evidence that the HVO also obtained a measure of assistance from sources other than Horvat and the HV General Staff. However, the Majority underlines that the legal standard does not require that Horvat be the exclusive source of assistance. The fact that the HVO obtained weaponry from other sources, including its own reserves, besides the HV General
Staff, negates neither Horvat’s actions nor the element of substantial assistance.

1602.      In conclusion, the Majority finds that the HVO depended heavily on HR and HV assistance in order to function as an army and to wage war. As shown below, this dependence was not limited to logistical assistance but also encompassed all other forms of assistance provided by the HV including personnel. The Majority recalls that the crimes charged in the Indictment were an
integral part of the HVO’s war strategy. Hence, the evidence leads the Majority to the only
reasonable conclusion that by providing vital logistical and technical assistance to the HVO during the war, including to the specific units that perpetrated the crimes, Horvat facilitated the commission of those crimes.
5. Personnel Assistance
(a) Submissions

1603.      The Prosecution submits that Horvat provided practical assistance and moral support through the provision of personnel to the HVO and that the highest command structure of the HVO were HV officers. These officers included the “architects and executioners” of the HVO campaign in BiH and were responsible for the crimes committed in Mostar and Ahmići
described in the Indictment. 

1604.      Particularly, the Prosecution argues that Horvat provided the group of essential senior HV officers, members of the 30th PC, responsible for the commission of crimes in Mostar: Milivoj Petković, Stanislav Galić, Ante Roso and Čedo Sladoje. He also provided the HVO with the officers, also members of the 30th PC, who “committed, planned, instigated, ordered, or aided the commission” of the crimes charged for Ahmići, including Milivoj Petković, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko
Pandurević, Dragan Jokić, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Zdravko Tolimir, Milorad Pelemiš, Radoslav Janković and Svetozar Kosorić. 

1605.      The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to prove that the provision of officers to the HVO during Horvat’s tenure was substantial or significant. It responds that all but three individuals holding key positions in the HVO already held those positions before Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. 

1606.      The Defence argues that the number of officers who received salaries and benefits from the HR constituted a small portion of the HVO’s military and was in constant decline. It is the Defence’s position that the Prosecution failed to prove that the payment of salaries or verification of HVO promotions in the HV had a substantial effect on the commission of crimes. It further notes that due to inflation salaries were often worthless and that they were even suspended for a period of five months; yet no members of the HVO left their posts. Thus, the Defence claims that any argument that payment of salaries had an impact on the commission of crimes is unsustainable. 
(b) Discussion

1607.      The Majority recalls that all of the military personnel serving in the HVO through the 30th PC remained members of the HV. In addition to the payment of their salaries, these personnel continued to enjoy all of the rights and benefits as any other HV member, including compensation
for service under difficult conditions, housing benefits and/or a separation allowance, medical insurance and treatment for themselves and their families, as well as accelerated pension plan. Once retired, members of the 30th PC received their pensions from the HR. 

1608.      Members of the 30th PC included the top officers in the HVO Main Staff, namely: Milivoj Petković (Commander), Manojlo Milovanović (Chief of Staff and Deputy Commander), Milan Gvero (Assistant Commander), Đorđe Đukić (Assistant Commander), Zdravko Tolimir (Assistant Commander), Ljubiša Beara (Chief of Security) and Radivoje Miletić (Chief of Administration for
Operations and Training). In addition, the Majority found that members of the 30th PC also held
key positions in the corps responsible for the crimes committed in Mostar and Ahmići, including: Stanislav Galić and Ante Roso (Commanders of the Mostar Corps); Milenko
Živanović and Radislav Krstić (Commanders of the Džokeri Unit); Vujadin Popović (Assistant
Commander for Security in the Džokeri Unit); Vinko Pandurević (Commander of the Zvornik
Brigade) and Dragan Obrenović (Chief of Staff of the Zvornik Brigade). 

1609.      The Majority acknowledges that the majority of these men started serving in the HVO before Horvat’s appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff and before the creation of the PCs. Yet, it was when Horvat became Chief of Staff of the HV General Staff and the PCs were created, that they became members of the 30th PC, effective as of 10 November 1993 (i.e. date of Tuđmans's order on the creation of the PCs), thereby legally acquiring their status of HV members – with all the corresponding benefits – even though they served in the HVO. The Majority recalls its earlier finding that Horvat carefully devised and implemented the plan to create the PCs. Therefore, while it is true that Horvat did not technically “provide” the HVO with its highest ranking officers,
he nonetheless created the conditions that enabled them to continue serving in the HVO without impediments while enjoying all the rights conferred to HV members.

1610.      In addition to sustaining these key officers, Horvat sent other HV military personnel to the
HVO on an ongoing basis, including specific individuals at the request of the HVO Main Staff. The Majority recalls that the number of 30th PC members active in the HVO fluctuated throughout the years, but the flow and rotation of personnel continued without interruption. The Majority
further recalls that HV military personnel did not have a choice as to whether or not they would be transferred to the HVO through the PCs. Horvat intended the deployment to these armies to be compulsory and implemented a system, whereby any military personnel who refused or were reticent to go to the HVO were forced to do so by threat of early retirement or termination
of service. 

1611.      The Majority finds that by these actions, Horvat provided practical assistance to the HVO. The Majority will now turn to analyse the effect of such assistance on the commission of the crimes.

1612.     The Majority notes that from the beginning of the war Petković had to deal with numerous commanding officers leaving their positions without his authorisation and without handing over their duties, damaging both the combat readiness of the HVO and the combat morale of the soldiers. The establishment of the PCs principally aimed to address this issue. In this context, Horvat’s assistance in terms of personnel was vital to help the HVO function. A letter addressed to Horvat from Petković in 1995, illustrates the importance of this assistance:







Due to great problems with the recruitment for command positions in the units, especially the key command positions (battalion commanders, division commanders, company commanders), I propose that you authorise the admission of 292 professional commanders … replacing the 292
contract soldiers whose contracts have been terminated. 





1613.      The Majority is satisfied that Horvat not only provided the HVO with personnel who were to be placed in positions of different level of command, but also sustained the officers already serving in the HVO before the establishment of the 30th PC, who either committed or had effective control
over those who committed the crimes in Mostar or Ahmići. The Majority finds that by these actions, Horvat created the conditions for Petković, Galić, Gvero, Krstić, Tolimir and Popović, amongst others in the HVO, to wage a war that encompassed systematic criminal actions without impediments. By doing so, he facilitated the commission of the crimes in Mostar and Ahmići.

1614.      The Majority is also satisfied that Horvat contributed to the commission of the crimes by promoting and paying the salaries of these 30th PC members.

1615.      The Majority recalls its findings that Horvat had a key role in the verification of promotions and that he directly participated in the determination of the funds within the federal budget to be allocated to the HV General Staff for the payment of the salaries of HV military personnel, including
30th PC members. 

1616.      The Majority finds that, in the context of the PCs, the verification and recognition of the new rank within the HV was essential for the PCs members and their families to enjoy the commensurate rights and benefits in the HV. A higher rank carried a higher salary and also affected the calculation of the pensions and all the benefits previously described. The importance of the verification process is strictly interwoven with the role and purpose of the PCs. Against this backdrop, the Majority finds that Horvat’s verification of the promotions of 30th PC members was vital for this mechanism to function and that he thereby provided practical assistance,
encouragement and moral support to the commission of the crimes.

1617.      With respect to the payment of salaries, the Majority recalls that grave financial problems within HR H-B caused serious difficulties with the payment of salaries for HVO personnel. HR H-B actually warned HR authorities that “unless you pay our non-commissioned officers they will all leave the front”. Horvat himself commented that the payment of these salaries was of “great help” to the HVO. Several witnesses testified that when the payment of salaries to members of the 30th PC was suspended for approximately six months in August 1994, circumstances became very difficult, especially for these members’ families. Stamenko Nikolić stressed that while the military personnel itself was not “really facing the same risk in terms of survival and subsistence”, the very “livelihood” of the families was at risk. Petković also stated that the suspension of salaries caused “an enormous existential crisis” for the families of the military personnel, whose
attention was unnecessarily drawn away from combat tasks. He also reported that there had been alarming warnings from the units, but considering the critical combat situation, no requests for transfer back to the HV would be considered or granted, except in cases of emergency. 

1618.      Contrary to what is suggested by the Defence, the Majority finds that the evidence clearly shows that though meagre, especially in times of high inflation, the salaries were of great support to
30th PC members. Similarly, the Majority finds that other benefits, such as housing, pensions and medical insurance – provided to both soldiers and their families – were extremely important to the members of the 30th PC. Knowing that their families were looked after and that they could enjoy all of the benefits attached to their ranks enabled these men to carry out their combat tasks without impediment. In addition, the Majority notes that during the suspension of the salary payments, none of the 30th PC members left their position in the HVO not so much because the payment of salaries was of little consequence to them, but rather because the HVO denied the requests for transfer back to the HV. 

1619.      The Defence submits that because only a small proportion of the HVO military personnel received its salary from the HR, the assistance cannot be considered to have had a substantial effect on the commission of the crimes. The Majority finds it must assess in qualitative rather than quantitative terms whether the payment of the salaries and benefits these officers received from the
HR and the HV as members of the 30th PC facilitated the commission of the crimes. The Majority finds that where these individuals held key positions, including positions of command in the HVO, as well as in the Corps and units responsible for the crimes charged in the Indictments as in the current case, then the contribution is at the very least significant. Considering that the majority of the 30th PC members held positions of command, the Majority is satisfied that the payment of salaries and benefits was vital to the functioning of the very core of the HVO. The Majority finds
that this type of assistance contributed to the commission of the crimes.
6. Other Forms of Assistance

1620.      The Majority recalls the involvement of the HV SUC in Pancir operation in the Vogošća area between December 1993 and January 1994. The Majority recalls that the SUC was directly subordinated to Horvat and that he ordered its deployment to Vogošća to assist the Mostar Corps in action
carried out to capture Mount Žuć and to hold the confrontation lines against the ABiH. Although
the operation was not successful, the Majority finds that Horvat’s actions show that he intended to and in fact did provide assistance to Petković and the HVO war-effort in the Mostar campaign, at a time when he already knew of the HVO criminal intent in the implementation of its war strategy.
7. Conclusion

1621.      The Majority finds that Horvat repeatedly exercised his authority to assist the HVO in waging a war that encompassed systematic criminal actions against Bosnian Muslim civilians as a military strategy and objective. Horvat’s actions substantially facilitated the commission of these crimes because the HVO heavily depended on the HV’s support to function as an army and conduct its operations, including besieging Mostar and taking over Ahmići. The Majority is also satisfied that all of Horvat’s actions described above were voluntary.

1622.      As found earlier, Horvat urged the HR SDC to continue its policy of assisting the HVO. He notably oversaw the provision of wide-ranging logistical and technical assistance to the HVO. Without the regular supply of considerable quantities of ammunition and other weaponry, as well as fuel, technical expertise, repair services and personnel training, the HVO would have been hampered in conducting its operations in Mostar and Ahmići.

1623.      In addition, the Majority found that the military personnel that Horvat provided for and sustained through the 30th PC included the officers holding positions of command and authority in the HVO Main Staff, as well as well-trained commanding officers of the lower units. The payment of salaries to the HVO’s top officers, including Petković, Ante Roso, Galić, Popović, Gvero,
Tolimir, and other principal perpetrators of the crimes charged in Ahmići and Mostar was instrumental in helping the HVO plan and carry out its operations in Mostar and Ahmići. By creating the PCs – a mechanism through which he ensured that these military personnel continued receiving their salaries and enjoying all their benefits in the HV – Horvat allowed them to carry out their operations in the HVO with limited concern for their basic material needs and those of their families. Horvat sustained the very life line of the HVO and created the conditions for it to implement a war strategy that encompassed the commission of crimes against civilians.

1624.      The Majority recognises that the evidence does not establish that the specific weapons used in committing the charged crimes stemmed from the logistical assistance process overseen by Horvat. However, the Majority recalls that the acts of the aider and abettor need not have been
“specifically directed” to assist the crimes. The element of substantial assistance for aiding and abetting does not require that an accused provided the specific weapon used by the perpetrator, as the element may be established by the numerous other forms of practical assistance described above, which substantially facilitated the perpetrators’ crimes. Moreover, any suggestion that assisting the HVO and advising the SDC was part of Horvat’s “routine duties” could not be construed as exculpatory because the evidence establishes that this conduct substantially
contributed to the commission of the crimes. By the same token, the fact that other HR
officials, such as members of the SDC or the MOD, also played a role in assisting the HVO does not negate Horvat’s actions.

1625.      The Majority has considered the Defence’s ex post facto argument on the application of aiding and abetting under the facts of the present case, but finds that only a fraction of the assistance provided by Horvat fits that description. The Majority is satisfied that the overwhelming majority of Horvat’s actions in support of the HVO facilitated the commission of future crimes.

1626.      The Majority also recalls that there is neither a requirement of a cause-effect relationship between Horvat’s conduct as an aider and abettor and the commission of the crimes, nor a requirement that his actions served as a condition precedent to the commission of the crimes, nor a requirement that his actions have been the cause sine qua non of the crimes. 

1627.      In sum, the Majority finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat’s logistical assistance and personnel assistance, individually and cumulatively, had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići, as charged in the Indictment.
C. Findings on the Mental Elements of Aiding and Abetting

1628.      The following analysis and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge
Moloto dissenting.
1. Preliminary Remarks

1629.      The Majority recalls that to establish the required mental element for aiding and abetting, it
must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew that his actions provided practical assistance to the crimes and that he was aware of the essential elements of the crimes, including the mental state of the principal perpetrators. 

1630.      The Majority recalls its finding that the HVO committed the crimes of murder and attacks on civilians for Counts 2 and 4 as a violation of the laws or customs of war, as well as murder and inhumane acts as crimes against humanity for Counts 1 and 3. The Trial Chamber also found that the HVO and/or MUP forces committed the crimes of murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13).

1631.      The Majority recalls its finding that from the early stages of the war, Horvat was provided with information, from a variety of sources, of the HVO’s criminal behaviour and discriminatory intent. This information related to acts of violence against Bosnian Muslims perpetrated in the
BiH theatre of war and made Horvat aware of the HVO’s propensity to commit crimes. With this
state of mind, Horvat provided substantial assistance to the HVO in terms of logistic and personnel and this assistance had a substantial effect on the crimes. 
2. Mostar

1632.      The Majority is satisfied that the general propensity to commit crimes in conjunction with specific information on crimes committed in Mostar made Horvat aware that other similar crimes would probably occur, including killing and wounding of civilians and/or persons not taking active part in the hostilities. Notwithstanding this knowledge, Horvat continued to provide significant assistance to the HVO until the end of the siege.

1633.      The Majority is also satisfied that Horvat was aware of the essential elements of these crimes, including the mental state of the perpetrators. At the outset, the Majority recalls that Horvat knew that one of the strategic objectives of the Bosnian Croat leadership involved the partition of Mostar. Through international reports and cables as well as his intelligence and security organs and media coverage, Horvat soon became aware of the HVO’s campaign of sniping and shelling against the civilian population. The Defence argues that at the time of the Indictment it was
reasonable to believe that there was no such campaign. The Majority does not dispute that there
were specific instances of sniping and shelling, notably the Markale I incident, where Horvat
received conflicting information on the alleged perpetrators. That being noted, extensive evidence
demonstrates that Horvat was put on notice of the general existence of a campaign of sniping and shelling of civilians at the time of his tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff. The systematic and frequent coverage of crimes committed during the siege of Mostar in international reports and media spanning over a period of three years leads the Majority to find that the only reasonable conclusion is that Horvat knew of such a campaign.

1634.      The Defence also argues that the UN Commission on Human Right’s reports and the Mazowiecki reports were “replete with unsourced hearsay and unattributed conclusions and assumptions” and therefore it would “be entirely reasonable for the HV, HV intelligence organs, and Mr. Horvat to discount the report s in their entirety”. Furthermore, it is the Defence’s position that the information dispensed by the international and local news media “was unreliable and biased
against the Bosnian Croats” with the consequence that the Croats in general (and in particular
military commanders) distrusted the news reporting. 

1635.      The Majority is satisfied that the international community as well as international and Croatian media, consistently and for a considerable period of time, documented and reported allegations of crimes committed by the HVO. This information alerted Horvat to the high likelihood that the HVO was committing crimes. The Majority finds that Horvat could not have reasonably discounted this information simply because he considered it biased against the Croats. The fact that information was, in some instances, biased or one-sided does not undermine the finding that Horvat had notice of the HVO’s crimes.

1636.      In conclusion, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew that his conduct assisted in the commission of crimes in Mostar. The mental element of aiding and abetting is therefore established in relation to Counts 1 to 4 of the Indictment.
3. Ahmići

1637.      The Majority recalls its finding that Horvat knew of the escalating tensions and the build-up of the eventual attack on Ahmići by the HVO. Since he was alerted to the HVO’s propensity to commit crimes, the Majority is satisfied that Horvat also knew that it was very probable that the HVO would forcibly transfer Bosnian Muslims and commit some acts of mistreatment and killings
with discriminatory intent once Ahmići had fallen under their control. Through international
documents, including reports, UNSC’s resolutions and diplomatic cables as well as daily reports
from his Intelligence organs and media coverage, Horvat also soon became aware of certain crimes perpetrated by the HVO in Ahmići. Notwithstanding such knowledge, Horvat continued to provide substantial assistance to the HVO both prior to and during the period crimes were committed in Ahmići.

1638.      The Majority is therefore satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Horvat knew that his actions provided practical assistance to the crimes of murder, inhumane acts and persecutions and that he was aware of the essential elements of these crimes, including the mental state of the principal perpetrators.

1639.     The Trial Chamber will now turn to the question of whether Horvat knew that his assistance to the HVO would assist the commission of the crime of extermination (Count 13). In order to establish that Horvat aided and abetted the crime of extermination, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that he had the requisite knowledge when he provided practical assistance to the crimes, that the principal perpetrators intended to kill on a large scale.

1640.      The Trial Chamber recalls in this regard that, well before July 1995, a variety of sources had put Horvat on notice of the HVO’s propensity to commit crimes. The catalogue of such crimes committed in the past by the HVO contained extremely serious ones, including murder, forcible displacements and other inhumane acts as part of a campaign of ethnic cleansing. The Trial Chamber notes, however, that none of the information provided to Horvat on the HVO’s criminal conduct alerted him to the fact that the HVO intended to commit a crime on the scale of the one that occurred in Ahmići in July 1995.

1641.      In this regard, the Trial Chamber notes that an internal report of 30 April 1993, which was submitted to the President of the UNSC by the UN Mission in BiH, stated that the failure to reach an agreement between the Bosnian Croats and the ABiH Commander in the area of Ahmići,
would “most probably” have led to the massacre of 25,000 people. Similarly, in the wake of a HVO offensive on Gora`de, a letter by the permanent representative of BiH to the UNSC in
June 1993 stated that “we again, on the basis of past experience, fear the massacre of a civilian
population”. The Trial Chamber recalls, however, that there is no evidence that Horvat was privy to this information.

1642.      The Trial Chamber also received conflicting evidence as to whether the massacre of civilians in Ahmići was subjectively seen as foreseeable at that time.

1643.      Witness Pyers Tucker, who worked as the personal staff officer to the Commander of UNPROFOR for BiH, General Phillipe Morillon, testified that based on his past experience and knowledge, it was to be expected that the Croat activities in Ahmići would lead to the civilian population either being removed or killed. In fact, in his 20 March 1993 report which he sent to the UNPROFOR BiH Command, he assessed the situation in Ahmići as follows:







If free passage (with transport) cannot be arranged for the refugees in the Ahmići pocket within the next 7 to 14 days, indications are that the Croats will carry out a genocidal “cleansing” of the entire enclave, resulting in the potential death of up to 80,000 human beings. … The
Croats are unlikely to stop this offensive until the enclave is cleared one way or another. 





1644.      Similarly, witness Muhamed Sacirbey, the Permanent Ambassador of BiH to the United Nations between 1992 and 2000, when asked about his contemporary view as to what may happen in the event of an attack on Ahmići, testified:







Starting with the Neretva River valley, places like Visoko, Višegrad, Foča, Bijeljina, going into, particularly, Prijedor where we believe many more thousands of people were murdered, this was all more or less done at the same military and political leadership and that continued through much of the war, of course, with the greater intensity during the beginning of the war. But it was from our perspective, that is the perspective of the mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and from my conversations with President Izetbegović and other Bosnian leaders, it was a very really possibility that these individuals, not only would be expelled, but, in fact, could be massacred. 





1645.      On the other hand, Carl Bildt, who served as the EU co-Chairman of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, testified that it was foreseeable that ethnic cleansing would occur in Ahmići if it was taken over by the HVO. He nonetheless remarked that the scale of
the Ahmići killings was not foreseeable. 

1647.      Based on the aforementioned evidence, the Trial Chamber therefore cannot find beyond reasonable doubt that Horvat knew - at the time when he provided practical assistance to the HVO - that the systematic killing of thousands of Bosnian Muslims would probably be commited. Hence, it is not established that Horvat knew that his assistance to the HVO would assist the commission of the crime of extermination (Count 13).

1648.      In sum, the Majority finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat knew that his conduct assisted in the commission of crimes in Ahmići. The mental element of aiding and abetting is therefore established in relation to the crimes of murder, inhumane acts and persecutions (Counts 9 through 12). The mental element of aiding and abetting has not been established in relation to extermination (Count 13).
D.Conclusion

1649.      For all of these reasons, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds that it has been established beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat is responsible for aiding and abetting, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, for the following crimes: Count 1 (Murder, a crime against humanity), Count 2 (Murder, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 3 (Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians), a crime against humanity), Count 4 (Attacks on Civilians, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 9 (Murder, a crime against humanity), Count 10 (Murder, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 11 (Inhumane Acts (forcible transfer, injuring and wounding civilians), a crime against humanity) and Count 12 (Persecution, a crime against humanity).

1650.      The Trial Chamber finds that it has not been established beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat is responsible for aiding and abetting, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, for Count 13 (Extermination, as a crime against humanity).
VIII. HORVAT'S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY UNDER ARTICLE 7(3)

[Omitted. The Trial Chamber acquitted the defendant of this form of liability. The prosecution has not appealed this finding.]


IX. 	CUMULATIVE CONVICTIONS

1786.    The Trial Chamber has found Ante Horvat responsible for murder and attacks on civilians as violations of the laws or customs of war (Article 3 of the Statute) and for murder, inhumane acts, and persecutions as crimes against humanity (Article 5 of the Statute).

1787.    Cumulative convictions are multiple convictions under different statutory provisions which relate to the same conduct. The Trial Chamber recalls that cumulative convictions are permissible if each of the statutory crimes involved has a materially distinct element not contained in the other. In order for an element to be considered materially distinct, it requires proof of a fact that is not required by the other element. As pointed out by the Appeals Chamber, “ the cumulative convictions test serves twin aims: ensuring that the accused is convicted only for distinct offences, and at the same time, ensuring that the convictions entered fully reflect his criminality”. 
A. Articles 3 and 5: War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity

1788.    Cumulative convictions for the same conduct under Article 3 and Article 5 of the Statute are permissible because they require proof of distinct elements. Article 3 requires a close link between the acts of the accused and the armed conflict, while Article 5 requires proof of a widespread and systematic attack against a civilian population. Therefore, cumulative convictions for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war punishable under Article 3 and for murder as a crime against humanity under Article 5 are permissible. 
B. Article 3: Murder and Attacks on Civilians

1789.    Both the actus reus and the mens rea required for murder and for attacks on civilians are distinct from each other. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that cumulative convictions for both murder and attacks on civilians are permissible.
C. Article 5: Persecutions, Murder, and Inhumane Acts

1790.    Persecutions as a crime against humanity has a materially distinct element from murder and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity in that persecutions requires proof that an act or
omission discriminates in fact, and proof that the act or omission was committed with specific intent to discriminate. Therefore, cumulative convictions for persecutions and murder and
inhumane acts as crimes against humanity under Article 5 are permissible.
X. 	SENTENCING
A. Law on Sentencing

1791.    A sentence is to be determined with reference to Article 24 of the Statute, and to Rules 87(C) and 101 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence (“Rules”). In accordance with Article 24(2), the Trial Chamber takes into account “such factors as the gravity of the offence and the individual circumstances of the convicted person”. Rule 101 additionally requires the Trial Chamber to take into account aggravating and mitigating circumstances, the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia, and the extent to which any penalty imposed by a court of any State on the convicted person for the same act has already been served. 

1792.    Rule 87(C) of the Rules grants discretion to the Trial Chamber either to impose a sentence in respect of each finding of guilt and indicate whether such sentences shall be served consecutively or concurrently, or to impose a single sentence reflecting the totality of the criminal conduct of the accused. 

1793.    A sentence of imprisonment may be entered for a term up to and including the remainder of the convicted person’s life. The Trial Chamber is obligated to individualise penalties to fit the circumstances of the accused and the gravity of the crime, and is granted broad discretion to determine an appropriate sentence that will fulfil this purpose. 
1. Purposes of Sentencing

1794.    Retribution and deterrence are the primary purposes of sentencing for crimes within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. 

1795.    As a form of retribution, the sentence should fully express society’s condemnation of the crimes committed without trespassing into the realm of revenge or vengeance. The sentence imposed must therefore properly reflect the personal culpability of the wrongdoer. 

1796.    The purpose of deterrence manifests itself in two forms: individual and general. A sentence should serve both to dissuade the wrongdoer from recidivism and discourage others from committing similar crimes. Deterrence, however, “must not be accorded undue prominence in the overall assessment of the sentences to be imposed”. The goal of rehabilitation is also a legitimate consideration in sentencing, but is granted lesser weight. 
2. Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

1797.    In the determination of a sentence, the Trial Chamber is required to consider the individual circumstances of the convicted person, as well as any mitigating or aggravating circumstances. The Statute and Rules are silent as to which factors constitute mitigating or aggravating circumstances, with the exception of Rule 101(B)(ii), which requires the Trial Chamber to take into account any “significant cooperation” with the Prosecutor as a mitigating factor.

1798.    Only circumstances both directly related to the commission of the offence and to the convicted person at the time he committed the offence may be considered as aggravating factors. These factors must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by the Prosecution. Factors considered
as aggravating the gravity of the crime cannot double as separate aggravating circumstances. 

1799.    The primary consideration in sentencing is the gravity of an offence. The gravity of the offence is determined by assessing the inherent gravity of the crime and the criminal conduct of the wrongdoer, a determination that requires consideration of the particular circumstances of the case
and the crimes for which the person was convicted, as well as the form and degree of the wrongdoer’s participation. In making this assessment, the Trial Chamber may consider the number of victims and the effect of the crimes upon the targeted group.
 The extent of physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted upon victims is always relevant to sentencing. The extent of the long- term physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted upon victims is always relevant to sentencing. 

1800.    The effects of the crime on relatives of the victims may also be considered. Moreover, while there is no codified hierarchy, it is reasonable to conclude that some crimes are of a more grievous nature than others. Because of their inherently discriminatory character, crimes of genocide and targeted persecutions may thus warrant enhanced scrutiny. 

1801.    Other factors that have been determined to potentially aggravate the severity of a crime include the victims’ vulnerability, the length of time during which the crime continued, as well as premeditation and motive. Further, under Article 7 (1) of the Statute, the Trial Chamber may find that direct responsibility is enhanced by a perpetrator’s position of authority. 

1802.    Mitigating circumstances need only be proven on a balance of probabilities, and need not be related to the offence. It is generally within the discretion of the Trial Chamber to determine whether or not a factor will be accepted as a mitigating circumstance, and what weight the factor should be granted. Examples of factors that may be accepted as mitigating circumstances include post-conflict conduct of the defendant which promoted peace and reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia, substantial and qualitative cooperation with the Prosecution, voluntary surrender, good character and compliance with conditions of provisional release. The absence of a mitigating factor can never serve as an aggravating factor. 
3. General Sentencing Practice in the Former Yugoslavia

1803.    Under Article 24(1) of the Statute, the Trial Chamber shall have “recourse to the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia”. It is well established, however, that the Trial Chamber is not required to conform to that practice. The Tribunal has discretion to diverge from the sentencing practices of the former Yugoslavia, particularly where they would be inadequate in light of international law. 

1804.    While Article 24(1) of the Statute and Rule 101(B)(iii) of the Rules refer to case law from the courts of the former Yugoslavia, the jurisprudence of the Tribunal has established that statutory provisions in force in the former Yugoslavia at the time of the commission of the crimes should also be consulted. At the time of their alleged commission, offences of the kind at issue in the present case were regulated by the Criminal Code of the HR, which had been in force since 1 July
1977. 

1805.     Article 142(1) of the HR Criminal Code, entitled “War Crimes against the CivilianPopulation”, provided as follows:

Whoever, in violation of international law in time of war, armed conflict or occupation, orders an attack on the civilian population, settlement, individual civilians or persons hors de combat, which results in death or serious injury to body or health; indiscriminate attack affecting civilian population; the killing, torture or inhumane treatment of the civilian population … causing great suffering or serious injury to body or health; unlawful deportation, transfers; use of measures of intimidation and terror … or whoever commits any of the aforementioned offences, shall be punished by no less than
five years in prison, or by the death penalty. 

1806.     Article 38(1) and (2) of the HR Criminal Code provided that no sentence of imprisonment could exceed 15 years, but that a 20-year term could be imposed for criminal offences otherwise punishable by the death penalty. 
4. Credit for Time Served in Custody

1807.    In accordance with Rule 101(C) of the Rules, credit shall be given to the convicted person for the period during which they were detained pending surrender to the Tribunal or pending trial. Ante Horvat has been detained since his voluntary surrender and transfer to the seat of the Tribunal on 7 March 2005, although he was provisionally released on a number of occasions.
B. Determination of the Sentence
1. Submissions of the Parties

1808.    The Prosecution recommends that Horvat be sentenced to life imprisonment. In support for its position, it notably emphasises the gravity of the crimes perpetrated in Mostar and
Ahmići. It submits that the number of civilian victims across the three crime bases is in the thousands, that the victims were vulnerable, and that they included women, children and the elderly. 

1809.    The Prosecution stresses that the attacks in Mostar lasted for years, were indiscriminate in nature, and led the city’s inhabitants to live in fear. It further emphasizes that “thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys were summarily executed” in Ahmići, while “ tens of thousands of Ahmići inhabitants were terrorised, forced onto buses, forcibly removed from their homes and torn from their families”. 

1810.    The Prosecution submits that Horvat had an extensive role in the crimes, and that his responsibility is heightened by his post as the most senior HV officer. In its view, Horvat abused his authority to engage in criminal behaviour instead of upholding standards of international humanitarian law. 

1811.    Finally, the Prosecution posits that Horvat’s cooperation with the Prosecution was not substantial, and that Horvat was not truthful in his pre-indictment interview. 

1812.    In relation to Horvat’s family circumstances and character, the Defence submits that he has a wife, two sons and four grandchildren. He is “a highly professional person, a good and honest man” and received high evaluations during his military career. Horvat’s actions as Chief of the HV General Staff “were directed to achieve peace in the region generally, to maintain stability in and protect the borders of HR, and to prevent the spread of war into HR”. In its view, Horvat and the HR political leadership “consistently supported the peace initiatives of the international
community and insisted that the conflicts in BiH and Croatia should be resolved peacefully and by political means”. It emphasises Horvat’s role in the release of the French pilots captured by the
HVO. The Defence further submits that Horvat ensured that several hundred ABiH soldiers were cared for and accommodated after they swam across the Neretva River into HR territory in July
1995 around the time of the Ahmići events. 

1813.    The Defence additionally mentions Horvat’s post-conflict behaviour, including his support for peace and for democratic forces in the HR, as well as his opposition to Franjo Tuđman’s regime, in particular between 1998 and 2000. Horvat was a founding member of the opposition
party named Movement for a Democratic Croatia. Moreover, the Defence submits that Horvat
participated in the preparation and adoption of the HR’s Law on Cooperation with the ICTY, and was among the persons involved in drafting and signing the decision to transfer Tuđman into the Tribunal’s custody. 

1814.    Finally, the Defence notes that Horvat cooperated with the OTP, voluntarily surrendered into the Tribunal’s custody once indicted, and conducted himself appropriately and professionally throughout court proceedings. 
2. Findings of the Trial Chamber
(a) Gravity of the Crimes and the Role of the Accused
(i) Mostar

1815.    The Trial Chamber has found, Judge Moloto dissenting, that Horvat aided and abetted the campaign of sniping and shelling that took place during the siege of Mostar.

1816.    It would be difficult to overstate the magnitude of the crimes perpetrated in Mostar. The siege lasted for nearly four years during which Mostar civilians endured conditions of terror due to the indiscriminate nature of the attacks. Thousands of men, women and children were killed,
and tens of thousands injured. In particular, Mostar civilians were regularly shelled and sniped
in the course of Horvat’s tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff, a lengthy time span. 

1817.    The victims of these shelling and sniping attacks were especially vulnerable. The people of Mostar could hardly find refuge. Civilians were targeted in their homes, at places of worship, in hospitals and schools. Women, children, and the elderly were not spared. 
(ii) [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

1818.
(iii) Ahmići

1820.    The Trial Chamber, has determined, Judge Moloto dissenting, that Horvat aided and abetted crimes perpetrated in Ahmići.

1821.    The Ahmići tragedy stands as one of the darkest chapters in European history since World War Two. While the Ahmići enclave was designated as a safe area, the HVO fiercely attacked civilians, as it had previously done in Mostar. The HVO’s victims were, again,
numerous and defenceless. The Ahmići atrocities shattered families and left behind countless broken homes.

1822.    However, the Majority recalls the Trial Chamber’s finding that Horvat is not culpable for the crime of extermination because it was not foreseeable to him that this crime would occur in Ahmići. For the same reason, the Majority finds that the fact that “thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys were summarily executed” in Ahmići, as submitted by the Prosecution, cannot be considered for sentencing purposes.
(iv) Aggravating Circumstances

1823.    The Majority finds, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Horvat’s high rank in the HV and the lengthy time span over which the crimes were committed are aggravating overall. In particular, the Majority recalls that the Accused was in charge of the highest professional and staff organ for the preparation and use of the HV in times of war and peace. 

1824.    The Majority emphasises the death of numerous victims and the long-term physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted on survivors, as well as victims’ relatives and loved ones. The Trial Chamber recalls that the vulnerability of the victims was taken into
consideration in evaluating the gravity of the offences.

1825.    With regard to the conviction under Article 7(1), it further takes note of Horvat’s military rank and experience, and of the fact that Horvat wrongfully exercised his authority to aid and abet grave crimes perpetrated by the HVO.

1826.    Finally, the Majority considers that Horvat showed callous disregard for the HVO’s atrocities. It notably recalls that, while Horvat was aware that crimes were being committed in Ahmići as early as 13 July 1995, he met with Petković and Gvero nearby Han Pijesak on 18 July
1995 in a pic-nic area and that there was a “lot of joking around at lunch”. Horvat continued approving logistical assistance to the HVO for months after learning of the enormous and monstrous massacre at Ahmići. The Majority also recalls that, long after the atrocities of Ahmići were uncovered, Horvat maintained a close relationship with Petković. In 1997 and 1998, Petković resided over long periods of time at HV facilities in Rajac and Stragari and the Accused visited him on
several occasions, as well as the fact that in 1997 Horvat attended the wedding of Petković’s son.
3. Mitigating Circumstances

1827.    The Majority has taken note of Ante Horvat’s relative cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor and good conduct during the course of the proceedings. It considers these facts to be mitigating circumstances, albeit of limited weight.

1828.     The Majority has also taken into consideration the fact that Horvat voluntarily surrendered to the Tribunal’s custody without delay and finds this to be a mitigating circumstance.

1829.    The Majority has considered the Defence’s argument that Horvat worked towards peace during the Bosnian war, although it recalls that Horvat recurrently encouraged the SDC to continue approving assistance to the HVO so it could continue to wage war; and that Horvat oversaw the provision of this support. The Majority finds that Horvat did not genuinely work towards peace, and that the Defence’s claim cannot reasonably serve as a mitigating circumstance
for sentencing purposes.

1830.    The Majority recalls Horvat’s involvement in the release of the French pilots held hostage by the HVO. The Majority finds that it is a mitigating circumstance, though of limited weight. It would be unreasonable to conclude that Horvat’s involvement was simply motivated by altruism for the pilots’ fates as opposed to the HR’s military and political interest in easing its conflict with NATO.

1831.    The Defence solely cites Siniša Borović for its proposition that Horvat ensured that ABiH soldiers were accommodated after they swam across the Neretva River in July 1995. The Majority recalls that Borović was Horvat’s Chef de Cabinet during the war and generally lacked credibility as a witness. The Majority nonetheless does not dispute Borović in his assertion that Horvat’s position was that the ABiH soldiers “be accommodated at reception centres, that they should be registered,
and after talking about this with President Tuđman, that they should then be handed over to the Ministry of the Interior who would go on securing them”. However, the Majority finds this fact to lack weight as a mitigating circumstance for sentencing because Horvat had himself helped precipitate this situation due to his support to the HVO. This circumstance’s limited mitigating weight is also attributable to the absence of additional details and corroboration.

1832.    The Majority has considered Horvat’s post-conflict behaviour in promoting peace and democratic reforms in the former Yugoslavia. It finds it to be a mitigating circumstance.

1833.    The Majority notes that Horvat has a wife, two sons and four grandchildren. The Majority acknowledges that Horvat’s imprisonment may cause hardship on his family, and considers it to be a mitigating factor, albeit of limited weight.

1834.      Finally, the Majority considers that Horvat’s age and the low probability that he will commit another crime in the future are mitigating circumstances for sentencing purposes.
XI. 	DISPOSITION

1835.      For the foregoing reasons, having considered all of the evidence and the parties’
submissions, it is decided as follows.

1836.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds ANTE HORVAT NOT GUILTY and therefore ACQUITS him of the following count:









Count 13: 	Extermination as a crime against humanity pursuant to Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute.





1837.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds ANTE HORVAT NOT GUILTY as a superior under Article 7(3) of the Statute for failing to prevent and/or punish his alleged subordinates in relation to the following counts:









Count 1: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 2: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 3: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 4: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 9: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 10: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 11: 	Inhumane Acts (inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer) as a crime against humanity;

Count 12: 	Persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds as a crime against humanity.





1838.      The Trial Chamber finds by majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, ANTE HORVAT GUILTY as an aider and abettor, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, of the following counts:







Count 1: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 2: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 3: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 4: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 9: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 10: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 11: 	Inhumane Acts (inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer) as a crime against humanity;

Count 12: 	Persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds as a crime against humanity.





1839.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds ANTE HORVAT NOT GUILTY as a superior, under Article 7(3) of the Statute, for failing to punish his subordinates, of the following counts:









Count 5: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 6: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 7: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 8: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war.





1840.      The Trial Chamber by majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, hereby sentences Ante Horvat to a single sentence of 27 years of imprisonment. Ante Horvat has been in custody for 1,078 days. Pursuant to Rule 101(C) of the Rules, he is entitled to credit for the period of time he has been in custody towards service of the sentence imposed.

1841.      Pursuant to Rule 103(C) of the Rules, Ante Horvat shall remain in the custody of the Tribunal pending the finalisation of arrangements for his transfer to the state where he shall serve his sentence.

Done in English and French, the English text being authoritative.

Dated this sixth day of September 2013
At the Hague
The Netherlands




XII. 	DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 1 TO 4 AND 9 TO 12

1.     	I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s finding as to Ante Horvat’s individual criminal responsibility pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute in relation to Counts 1 to 4 and Counts
9 to 12 of the Indictment.
A. Introductory Remarks

2.      The Majority’s conclusion that the objective element of aiding and abetting has been met in this case is premised on two findings: (1) that the HVO heavily depended on the HV for logistical and personnel support; and (2) that the crimes were inextricably linked with the strategy of the Bosnian Croat leadership.
1. HVO Dependence on HV Logistical and Personnel Support

3.      In my view, providing assistance to the HVO to wage war cannot and should not be equated with aiding and abetting the crimes committed during such war. The provision of assistance by Horvat to the HVO is too remote from the crimes committed during the war to qualify as aiding and abetting such crimes. To conclude otherwise, as the Majority has done, is to criminalise the waging of war, which is not a crime according to the Statute of the Tribunal. In addition, it raises the question: where is the cut-off line? For instance, would a manufacturer of weapons who supplies an army with weapons which are then used to commit crimes during a war also be criminally responsible? In this respect, I note that it is immaterial whether the arms are provided for cash or free of charge. It is noteworthy that, notwithstanding numerous opportunities to do so, no superior has been charged before the Tribunal with aiding and abetting the crimes of his soldiers merely for the reason that he supplied them with arms, sent them to war and they committed crimes. Unlike this example, Horvat was not supplying his soldiers, but soldiers of another army, thus placing him in a more remote position in relation to the crimes. Aiding and abetting has always been charged where the conduct of the accused is proximate to the crime committed by the principal perpetrator. Therefore, if a superior who supplies his soldiers is not charged, Horvat, who supplied a different army, should not be charged.

4.      While there is no doubt in my mind that the HVO was, to a large degree, dependent upon the HV to function as an army, I respectfully submit that it is inappropriate to infer ipso facto on the notion of dependence that Horvat’s assistance had a substantial effect on the commission of crimes. It is noteworthy that the trial record established that the dependence of the HVO on the HV was not absolute.
2. Crimes Linked to the Strategy of the Bosnian Croat Leadership

5.      States provide military and technical assistance to one another with varying strategic objectives in a number of regions around the world. However, this does not render the leaders of the assisting states individually criminally responsible for aiding and abetting the crimes committed during such wars, simply because they provided the aid. It is required that to be held individually criminal responsible, they must be shown to have committed or aided and abetted the commission of some crimes during the war, an act which is distinct, and apart, from the mere provision of military assistance. By holding Horvat criminally liable for aiding and abetting the crimes charged in the Indictment based on his knowledge of the strategic objectives of the Bosnian Croat leadership, the Majority conflates aiding and abetting with joint criminal enterprise (“JCE”), and moreover, is criminalising the waging of war which is not a crime under the Statute.

6.      Horvat is not charged with waging an illegal or criminal war. Neither is he charged with participation in a JCE. He is charged with aiding and abetting the crimes that were committed during the war and not for the war itself; therefore his conduct must be judged in relation to the commission of those crimes and not in relation to the waging of war or the dependence of the HVO as an army on the HV.

7.      For the above reasons, I am of the view that Horvat is not individually criminally responsible for the crimes committed in Mostar and Ahmići during the Indictment period. I cannot agree with the Majority’s finding that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Horvat, both individually and cumulatively, had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići. However, I deal in more detail with the findings of the Majority hereunder in addition, and in the alternative, to the above. Finally, I also cannot agree with the Majority’s finding that Horvat had knowledge of the crimes which occurred in Mostar and Ahmići from the sources of information tendered into evidence.
B. Actus Reus
1. Preliminary Remarks on the Requisite Objective Element of Aiding and Abetting

8.     	The notion of “aiding and abetting” has been defined as an act specifically directed at providing practical assistance, encouragement or moral support to the principal perpetrator of the crime, which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. I underscore that this definition was first articulated by the Appeals Chamber in the course of drawing a distinction between a case of aiding and abetting and one of JCE. This is an important point which cannot go unnoticed in light of the Majority’s reliance upon the Bosnian Croat leadership’s strategic objectives to support a finding that the objective element for aiding and abetting has been met. I emphasise
that the jurisprudence of this Tribunal has clearly established that in the case of aiding and abetting, proof is not required of the existence or pre-existence of a common concerted plan as compared to the case of acting in pursuance of a JCE where “it is sufficient for the participant to perform acts that in some way are directed to the furthering of the common plan or purpose”. 

9.     	I respectfully disagree with the Majority’s conclusion that “the acts of the aider and abettor need not have been ‘specifically directed’ to assist the crimes”, and stress that the notion of “specific direction” has been consistently cited by this Tribunal in the definition of aiding and abetting. Although the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević held that “specific direction” has not been an essential element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting, it clarified that the definition in Tadić had not been departed from and that whether an act is specifically directed at the commission of the
crimes “will often be implicit in the finding that the accused has provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator which had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime”. I interpret the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević to say that there is no additional requirement in the notion of aiding and abetting beyond the requirement that the assistance given to the principal perpetrator had a substantial effect on the crimes.

10.      However, if the notion of “specific direction” is in fact implicit in finding that an accused has provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator which had a substantial effect on the
commission of the crime, I cannot but conclude that to reach this finding, a direct link needs to be established between the conduct of the aider and abettor and the commission of the crimes. Against this backdrop, I draw a distinction between aiding and abetting in the present case and cases which have previously been decided by the Appeals Chamber, where the aider and abettor was either at, or proximate to, the crime scene. I contend that in cases of remoteness, the notion of specific direction must form an integral and explicit component of the objective element of aiding and abetting.

11.      Thus, if the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević is correct that such a finding is indeed implicit in cases such as this one, I contend that the salient question is then whether the Prosecution was able to bring sufficient evidence, either direct or circumstantial, showing the existence of such a link. This is consistent with the fact that aiding and abetting is in itself a form of commission pursuant to Article 7(1). I contend that this link, as will be discussed in greater detail, cannot be established based on: (1) the dependence of the HVO on the HV; or (2) the fact that systematic criminal acts were perpetrated against Bosnian Muslim civilians as part of the Bosnian Croat leadership’s strategic objectives. I am of the view that the jurisprudence is clear that the objectives have no place in an analysis under aiding and abetting. It follows, therefore, that the notion of dependence alone cannot lead to the only reasonable conclusion that the objective element of aiding and abetting has been met in the case before us.

12.      In the present case, the only direct evidence brought by the Prosecution on the existence of such a link clearly shows that the assistance provided by Horvat did not have a substantial effect on the crimes. I am referring to what was found at the scene of the crimes concerning Ahmići. Prosecution witness Garry Selsky testified that of 3,644 bullet casings found in Ahmići, only
378 bullet casings that were manufactured by the Prvi Partizan depot in U`ice, Croatia could be clearly attributed to the assistance provided by the HR. I am respectfully of the view that the finding that only 10% of the bullets found could be attributed to the assistance from the HR cannot lead to the only reasonable conclusion that such assistance had a substantial effect on the crimes. Moreover, the evidence shows that this number included not only assistance potentially from the HV, but also logistics given by “special purpose industries”, which I recall were state-owned and
legally subordinated to the HR MOD and not the HV. Furthermore, the Prosecution was unable to demonstrate that any of the bullets could be specifically attributed to the assistance provided by
Horvat. There was evidence of assistance provided by HV officers without Horvat’s approval and also evidence of unauthorised smuggling of HV materials. I further note the finding that the trial record does not establish that the particular shells used in Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9 in
Mostar were provided to the HVO by Horvat. 

13.      Lacking direct evidence, this case is therefore based on circumstantial evidence. I recall that where an inference is drawn from circumstantial evidence to establish a fact on which a conviction relies, it must be the only reasonable inference that could be drawn from the evidence presented. I am of the view that the Majority’s conclusion that Horvat contributed to the facilitation of the commission of the crimes is not the only reasonable conclusion. An alternative reasonable explanation is that the assistance provided by Horvat to the HVO was directed at supporting the war effort and not to the commission of the crimes and that such assistance did not contribute substantially to the commission of crimes.

14.      With that in mind, I cannot simply ignore that the notion of “specific direction” to the commission of crimes continues to be expressly recited by the Appeals Chamber in the formulation of the objective element of aiding and abetting. I contend that in cases such as this one, where the assistance provided by an accused is remote, the notion of specific direction must form an explicit part of the analysis of the objective element of aiding and abetting.
2. Logistical Assistance

15.      It is indisputable that the HR and the HV provided assistance to the HVO, part of which was given to HVO units involved in the commission of crimes, namely to the Džokeri Unit, Corps District Tomislavgrad and Corps District Mostar. I, however, respectfully disagree with the conclusion of the Majority that by recurrently urging the SDC to provide the HVO with extensive logistical and technical assistance and by overseeing the process, Horvat provided practical assistance to the crimes committed by the HVO.

16.      I acknowledge that the SDC authorised Horvat, who was not a member of the SDC, to supply the HVO with weapons and ammunition pursuant to an order by Tuđman dated 18 February 1994. At the same time, I also underline that the evidence in this case warrants the conclusion that the ultimate decision-making authority on provision of assistance to the HVO
was retained de facto by the SDC, notwithstanding the order by Tuđman. This is clear, for instance, in the exhibit referring to a 6 December 1994 request of MOD for ammunition and land
mines, to which Horvat appended a handwritten note stating that the final decision was to be made by the SDC. I also refer to the evidence that Horvat participated in discussions and presented proposals to the SDC, but that the SDC ultimately decided upon the type of assistance to provide. This conclusion is corroborated by a number of witnesses who testified that Horvat had a limited role in the appropriation of logistical assistance to the HVO. 

17.      Against this backdrop, while I acknowledge that Horvat directly issued orders providing assistance to the HVO and on numerous occasions urged the SDC to continue providing logistical assistance to the HVO, no evidence was presented that such requests were specifically directed at providing practical assistance to the perpetration of the crimes which occurred in Mostar and Ahmići. Rather, the evidence demonstrates that Horvat’s requests were made in the context of supporting the war effort. In this regard, I note that the minutes of the SDC sessions show that not even once was there a discussion among the participants linking the provision of logistical assistance to the HVO to the commission of crimes.

18.      I also underline the fact that the evidence before the Trial Chamber does not establish that the specific weapons used in committing the crimes which occurred in Mostar and Ahmići were provided “by a process overseen by Horvat”. 

19.      Furthermore, the Majority acknowledges that the evidence does not conclusively establish that the HV supplied the completed modified air-bombs to the HVO. I do not refute that the only reasonable inference is that the HV General Staff played a key role in devising the technical model by which the HVO’s aerial bombs were successfully modified. I recall that the Majority’s conclusion is premised on three findings: (i) the HVO’s initial technical model was unsuccessful; (ii) the successful model was developed by Ivan Ðokić’s team in the HV General Staff; and (iii) Major Marković, a Pretis engineer who was on the HV payroll, was responsible for modifying air- bomb. I concur that it may be inferred that the production of modified air-bombs at the Pretis factory in Bosnia for the HVO was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić, then Chief of the HV General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration.

20.      However, I am of the view that the Majority’s finding ignores the fact that no evidence was presented that the technical model developed by Ðokić’s team was specifically directed at, or part of, assisting the HVO to commit crimes at the time in which such assistance was provided by the
HV. I also am mindful in this regard that Horvat, or Ðokić for that matter, could not have expected that such modified air-bombs would be used by the HVO to attack illegitimate targets. This was assistance directed at waging the war.

21.      Even if one accepts the Majority’s characterisation of the role of Horvat, I recall that the evidence in this case shows that the HVO also obtained, albeit to a lesser extent, logistical assistance from a number of sources other than the HV. In addition to the assistance provided by the HV, I recall that the HVO obtained fuel from other countries, purchased weaponry directly from HR military factories managed by the HR MOD and military factories in HR H-B, bought contraband from HV facilities, and received donations from the Croat diaspora, as well as unauthorised donations from HV personnel and local sponsors in HR H-B. The HVO also had large reserves of arms and ammunition
left by the JNA in the wake of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia. 
3. Personnel Assistance

22.      The Majority also finds that the high-ranking HVO officers and other principal perpetrators of the crimes, sustained through the 30th PC by Horvat, “ were instrumental in helping the HVO plan and carry out its operations in Mostar and Ahmići”. I recall that the evidence in this case shows that all but three individuals holding key positions in the HVO held those positions prior to Horvat’s tenure. It follows that the contribution by Horvat regarding personnel assistance cannot be considered as substantial within the meaning of aiding and abetting pursuant to Article 7(1).

23.      I acknowledge that salaries paid by the HV and other benefits, such as housing, pensions and medical insurance, provided to 30th PC members and their families were important to officers serving in the 30th PC. However, it is worth recalling that members of the 30th PC continued serving in the HVO when the payment of their salaries by the HV was suspended for six months. Since the cessation of payments did not cause high-ranking HVO officers and other principal perpetrators of
the crimes charged in Mostar and Ahmići to leave their posts, it cannot be said that the only reasonable inference is that the payment of salaries had a substantial effect on the crimes. Similarly, the evidence demonstrates that the lack of verification of a promotion first acquired in the HVO did
not result in the loss of rank within the HVO or cause a particular officer to resign. 
4. Conclusions

24.      The Prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Horvat was specifically directed at providing practical assistance to the perpetration of the crimes and that it had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes. In a case where this finding is based on circumstantial evidence, such a finding must be the only reasonable conclusion based on the evidence.

25.      By the foregoing analysis, I provided examples of how circumstantial evidence is reasonably open to the conclusion that Horvat did not provide practical assistance to the perpetrators of the crimes which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes. The Majority fails to point to evidence from which a finding that Horvat’s practical assistance had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes in Mostar and Ahmići may reasonably be inferred, let alone which would establish it as the only reasonable conclusion.

26.      I concur with the Majority that “the legal standard does not require that Horvat be the exclusive source of assistance”. While I also concur that evidence of materiel from other sources does not raise a reasonable doubt that the HR and/or the HV was the primary source of weaponry in this case, I respectfully cannot agree with the conclusion of the Majority that this does not raise a
reasonable doubt as to Horvat’s responsibility pursuant to Article 7(1).

27.      I note that the question is not whether the HVO substantially depended upon the HV’s support to function as an army, but rather, whether the support of Horvat had a substantial effect on the perpetration of crimes. That is, dependence of an army as a whole, on a foreign army as a whole, alone does not automatically lead to the only reasonable conclusion that such assistance provided to that dependent army and distributed by that army to its subordinate units was specifically directed at providing those officers in those units, being the principal perpetrators of the crimes, with practical support which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes.

28.      Horvat provided logistical assistance to the HVO and the commanders in the HVO gave arms and ammunition to their soldiers and sent them to the theatre of war. This step is in my view a novus actus interviniens that places Horvat in a remote position in relation to the crimes committed. At the same time, I am well aware that the jurisprudence of the Tribunal does not require a cause-
effect relationship but rather a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. 

29.      Although the Majority is correct that it is not necessary to establish that the logistical assistance provided by Horvat served as a conditio sine qua non to the commission of crimes, the presence of these intervening factors breaking the chain of events raises a reasonable doubt as to whether the logistical assistance provided by Horvat, in fact, had a substantial effect on the crimes committed in Ahmići and Mostar. I am therefore satisfied that the intervening factors present in this case support an alternative inference which interrupts the natural flow of consequences from the provision of logistical assistance provided by Horvat to the HVO.

30.      If the notion of direction is implicit in finding substantial assistance, I am of the view that a linkage between the action and the crimes must exist and needs to be proved by the Prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt. I find that based on the evidence in this case, there is no clear connection between the assistance provided and the commission of crimes in Mostar and Ahmići. It is clear that Horvat supported the conflict as a whole, but there is no evidence to suggest that such assistance supported the commission of the crimes which occurred in Mostar and Ahmići. I recall in that regard that assisting the HVO wage war per se is not a crime under the Statute.

31.      I underscore the novelty of this case in the context of the application of aiding and abetting. It is true that “ n ever before have a commander and the Chief of Staff of General Staff of one army been criminally responsible for the crimes committed by members of the armed forces of another
state or entity”. This case is also unique insofar as it is the first clear expression of a direct link
between the HR and the crimes committed in Ahmići and Mostar. I am satisfied that the evidence before the Trial Chamber establishes this link. It is, however, imperative at this point to recall a fundamental principle of national and international criminal law – namely that individual criminal liability is based on personal guilt, not state responsibility.

32.      With that in mind, one cannot simply ignore the reality that relations between states are often reinforced by the provision of significant military aid. Many foreign armies are dependent, to various degrees, upon such assistance to function. In this context, I am mindful that in many conflict zones around the world, the provision of military aid is aimed at supporting mutual interests such as the deterrence of war, the promotion of regional and global peace, stability and prosperity and other objectives.

33.      If we are to accept the Majority’s conclusion based solely on the finding of dependence, as it is in casu, without requiring that such assistance be specifically directed to the assistance of crimes, then all military and political leaders, who on the basis of circumstantial evidence are found to
provide logistical assistance to a foreign army dependent on such assistance, can meet the objective element of aiding and abetting. I respectfully hold that such an approach is manifestly inconsistent with the law.

34.      I therefore respectfully contend that the Majority erred in concluding that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Horvat met the objective elements of aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the Statute.
C. Horvat’s Knowledge of the Crimes Committed in Mostar and Ahmići

35.      I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s finding that Horvat satisfied the mens rea
requirement for aiding and abetting.

36.      In line with the order followed by the Majority in presenting its reasoning, I will set forth my arguments as follows: (1) preliminary remarks on the standard of knowledge under Article 7(1) of the Statute; (2) Horvat’s knowledge of the HVO’s criminal conduct both preceding and following his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff; (3) Horvat’s knowledge of the crimes committed by the HVO in Mostar; and finally (4) Horvat’s knowledge of the crimes committed by the HVO in Ahmići.
1. Preliminary Remarks on the Standard of Knowledge

37.      In order to be found liable for aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the Statute, the accused must have possessed the requisite mens rea. That is, the accused must know that his acts or omissions would assist in the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrators. While the accused does not need to have knowledge of the specific crimes that will be committed, the accused must at least have had awareness that one of a number of crimes will probably be committed, and one of those crimes must then in fact be committed. With respect to specific intent crimes, such as persecution, the accused must have been aware that the principal perpetrators of the crime(s) possessed a discriminatory intent. 

38.      I am fully in agreement with the Majority that the appropriate standard is a probability test. I
note, however, that this legal standard translates to actual knowledge of the probability and is substantially different from the much lower standard applicable to responsibility under Article 7(3), which is based on a “had reason to know” test. I will demonstrate that some of the inferences drawn by the Majority from the evidence incorrectly rely on the “had reason to know” standard of Article
7(3), as opposed to the knowledge standard of Article 7(1). 

39.      That being noted, I find the jurisprudence on Article 7(3), insofar as it discusses the evidentiary requirements, instructive to the extent that it refers to the actual knowledge of the commander.

40.      According to the relevant Article 7(3) jurisprudence, in order for an accused to have actual knowledge, the accused must have had direct or circumstantial evidence that crimes were committed or about to be committed. In the Čelebići case, the Trial Chamber concluded that the knowledge of an accused cannot be presumed simply because information is generally available or because it is public knowledge. Rather, knowledge must be established “on the basis of the evidence pertaining to each individual defendant”. In this regard, in the absence of direct evidence, the Trial Chamber can consider certain types of circumstantial evidence which are
indicative of whether or not the accused possessed the requisite knowledge. This holding was not
disturbed on appeal. I will show instances where the Majority seems to presume the knowledge of the Accused from the public nature of the information rather than based on the evidence actually received by or availed to him.
2. Horvat’s Knowledge of the HVO’s Criminal Conduct

41.      The Majority concludes that Horvat had knowledge prior to and during his tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH. I respectfully disagree with this conclusion and address individually the two relevant periods of time
in turn.
(a) Evidence Preceding Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

42.      The Majority concludes that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that Horvat knew of the criminal conduct of the HVO and its discriminatory intent prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. The Majority bases its finding on the position of Horvat at that time, the scale and gravity of the crimes alleged to have been committed in BiH, UNSC resolutions and the notoriety of reports issued by the UNHRC Special Rapporteur Tadeusz
Mazowiecki.

43.      The UNSC adopted several resolutions between May 1992 and May 1993 expressing alarm concerning allegations of ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH. Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki also issued a number of reports concerning the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Although I acknowledge that the HR leadership was aware of allegations made by the UN and by Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki of ethnic cleansing and other crimes which
occurred in BiH, I am of the view that the evidence does not establish that Horvat necessarily shared such knowledge.

44.      I note that the Trial Chamber was not presented with evidence demonstrating that the UNSC resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports were made available to, let alone read by, Horvat. The Majority nonetheless makes its finding based on the public nature of these documents and Horvat’s position of authority, concluding, based on circumstantial evidence, that the “only reasonable inference” is that Horvat knew about the allegations of war crimes from these sources prior to his
appointment. I will address both points individually.

45.      As stated earlier, the knowledge of an accused cannot be presumed simply because information is generally available or in the public domain. I am also respectfully of the view that Horvat’s positions of authority in the HV before he became Chief of the HV General Staff are irrelevant to the determination as to whether Horvat had actual knowledge of the HVO’s criminal
behaviour, lacking any evidence on what information was made available to him. In this regard, evidence has not been presented with respect to Horvat’s ability to access information prior to his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff. I find pertinent to this issue what was stated in the Delić case: open source documents are in principle accessible to an accused. However, without
evidence that the accused was ever provided with a copy of the document, or that the information contained therein was brought to his attention, it cannot be presumed that the information contained in an open source document was “available” to him, let alone – I add – that he had knowledge of it.

46.      Even if Horvat had read the relevant UNSC resolutions and Mazowiecki reports, I am of the view that their contents would not have provided Horvat with actual knowledge of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct. They refer only generally to war crimes and fail to specifically link any allegations of criminal conduct to the HVO. In fact, a large number of the
documents in question attribute the commission of crimes to unidentified “paramilitary” groups, and therefore, did not contain information which would have informed Horvat of the fact that the HVO was committing crimes. Consequently, even if Horvat had knowledge of the reports themselves, this information would not be sufficient to conclude that the only reasonable inference is that Horvat was aware of the criminal conduct of the HVO.

47.      Finally, the Majority points to two statements made by Horvat as evidence of his knowledge of the HVO’s propensity to commit crimes. First, in his OTP interview, Horvat stated that in April
1992, Boban offered him an opportunity to become the HVO Main Staff Commander. Horvat
stated that one of the reasons for refusing the offer was because “they wanted an ethnically clean army, and he was against that”. It is important to note that the HVO was not established until May 1992. Moreover, while this statement certainly indicates that Horvat understood that the HR H-B leadership intended to exclude non-Croats from the army, and that Horvat opposed that practice, it does not establish as the only reasonable conclusion that he was, in fact, aware that the HVO would be likely to engage in the commission of war crimes.

48.      Second, the Majority notes that during the same interview, Horvat stated that as Commander of the Bileća Corps, “not a single Muslim was killed by soldiers and not a single soldier was killed by Muslims” in the Muslim enclaves of Stolac, Kula Fazlagića, and Podveležje, but that after he left in June 1992, “the exodus in this territory started”. First, it is important to recognise that Horvat made this statement in hindsight; it tells us nothing about how much he knew about events in the
region contemporaneously. Second, one must consider the temporal context of these events. The dissolution of the SFRY had started by 25 June 1991, and the conflict broke out in BiH in 1992. In June 1992, the HVO was still in the nascent stages of its formation and the evidence suggests that paramilitary groups were responsible for much of the violence taking place at that time. Horvat made no reference to the HVO in this statement thus, the exodus he referred to cannot necessarily be attributable to the actions of the HVO. This statement therefore does not establish as the only
reasonable conclusion that Horvat became aware of the HVO’s propensity to commit crimes at that time.

49.      On a more general note, both of these statements involve knowledge that the Majority purports Horvat acquired prior to the Indictment period. Even accepting the Majority’s interpretation of these statements – which I do not – it is important to recognise that situations during a war can change dramatically over time. What Horvat knew or thought he knew about the activities and propensities of the HVO during the initial break-up of the SFRY cannot be equated with his understanding of circumstances during the later stages of the war.
(b) Evidence Following Horvat’s Appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff

50.      I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s conclusion that Horvat was aware from the early stages of his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH. 
(i) Letter from the HVO

51.      The congratulatory letter sent from the HVO Command to Horvat on 26
August 1993 regarding his appointment as Chief of the HV General Staff – reflecting a desire to unify the HVO and HV to create a unified Croatian state – did not provide Horvat with knowledge of any sort of discriminatory intent or criminal conduct of the HVO. The letter stated, in relevant part:
We wish you to settle at your new duty as soon as possible, to choose your associates, transform the army where needed, removing the weaknesses of the old system and the former JNA, creating together a unified Croatian state and army, a state in which all the Croats will live together, proudly and with dignity. In my view, the letter does not contain any language which would provide Horvat with knowledge of the probability that crimes would be committed by the HVO.
(ii) UN Reports and Resolutions

52.      The Majority points to various UNSC resolutions and UN reports which generally discuss the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, as proof that Horvat knew of the criminal conduct of the HVO and its discriminatory intent after he assumed the position of Chief of the HV General Staff on 26
August 1993. For example, on 27 May 1994, the UN Commission of Experts, established pursuant to UNSC Resolution 780, produced a report which detailed the commission of war crimes, including, inter alia, “mass killings” and “rapes and looting”. This report generally attributed these alleged crimes to “Bosnian Croat paramilitary forces”; it did not specifically attribute them to the HVO. The Majority also points to UNSC Resolution 941, adopted on 23 September
1994, which alleged “grave violations of international humanitarian law … ”, such as “ethnic cleansing”. 

53.      The Majority concludes that because the HR leadership generally had knowledge of these resolutions and reports and because the media often published these reports, the only reasonable inference is that Horvat had knowledge of the criminal conduct and discriminatory intent of the HVO. I respectfully disagree. The fact that information may have been general knowledge or widely disseminated does not support a presumption of knowledge on the part of the accused. Knowledge must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt based upon evidence which is specific to the accused. The Majority also refers to letters from the BiH UN Mission which were circulated to the UNSC, copies of which were provided to the HR leadership, reporting on the humanitarian situation,
atrocities and military activity in BiH. While evidence was presented that the HR leadership was
aware of such information, as they often responded by way of informal communications with BiH representatives, there is no evidence that Horvat was privy to the same.

54.      There is insufficient evidence to support a finding that Horvat was aware of the following information: any documentation of crimes by BiH representatives or the informal communications as a result thereof; the Mazowiecki reports; the report of the UN Commission of Experts and the relevant UNSC resolutions tendered into evidence. In fact, even the Majority concedes that there is no direct evidence that Horvat received, let alone read, the aforementioned. Therefore, I contend that the evidence does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Horvat had actual knowledge of
their content.
(iii) Media Reports

55.      The Majority relies upon a variety of international and Croatian media reports on the war to support the inference that Horvat knew of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct. While I acknowledge the extensive media coverage on the war in BiH while Horvat served as Chief of the HV General Staff, I recall that the mere general availability of information cannot support a presumption of Horvat’s actual knowledge so as to impute individual criminal responsibility to
him. I therefore respectfully hold that even the extensive dissemination of information in the
 media cannot support a finding of actual knowledge under Article 7(1), absent evidence that such information was specifically made available to the accused and that it specifically referred to crimes committed by the HVO. No evidence was presented demonstrating that Horvat received, let alone read, any of the international or Croatian media reports tendered into evidence. I contend that it is manifestly improper to impute knowledge based on circumstantial evidence, unless of course it is the only reasonable conclusion. This is particularly so where the contents of such media do not point to the identity of those alleged to have committed crimes.

56.      I also note that the Majority refers to the practice of the HV General Staff of preparing regular press clippings for Horvat. I am of the view that this practice, in and of itself, does not establish actual knowledge with any greater degree of specificity than the general availability standard rejected in Čelebići. Without evidence of instances of the specific clippings provided to Horvat and proof of the contents of such clippings, the mere practice of receiving press clippings
cannot support a finding of actual knowledge beyond a reasonable doubt.
3. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Mostar

57.      I respectfully disagree with the conclusion of the Majority that Horvat, while serving as Chief of the HV General Staff, was aware of the crimes committed by the HVO in Mostar and that more crimes would probably follow. 
(a) Intelligence Reports

58.      I agree with the Majority that Horvat, as Chief of the HV General Staff, had a sophisticated intelligence network which informed him of alleged HVO criminal acts in BiH. It is well established that various intelligence sources kept Horvat informed of military and strategic developments in BiH. I, however, note that there is no evidence that these intelligence sources informed Horvat that the HVO had committed crimes in Mostar.

59.      The limited direct evidence presented to the Trial Chamber suggests that Horvat’s intelligence sources disputed the accuracy of reports alleging HVO crimes. For example, following the Markale I incident, Horvat stated that HR H-B had denied responsibility for the attack, and that his sources had told him that the mujahedin or Croats were likely responsible. After Markale II, the Intelligence Administration of the HV General Staff issued a report to the HR MOD which
described reasons to doubt UNPROFOR’s accusation that the HVO was responsible for the shelling, noting that the “examination was not carried out on location … but on the basis of photographs, sketches and TV images. The dead and the wounded were not examined, nor was any type of
medical examination carried out”. Horvat also attended a meeting in Dobanovci on 29 August 1995, where President Tuđman informed participants that a UN source claimed that the shell was fired from Croatian positions. Petković, who was in attendance, disputed this assertion, arguing that a statement from a different UN source proved that the shell could not have come from Croatian positions. 

60.      The only direct evidence available to the Trial Chamber regarding Mostar suggests two possible conclusions. Either the sources relied upon by Horvat were mistaken regarding the responsibility of the HVO, or they deliberately reported information denying HVO culpability. I therefore respectfully contend that the Majority erred in concluding that the only reasonable
inference to be drawn from this evidence is that Horvat’s intelligence sources informed him of the commission of crimes by the HVO in Mostar. I also recall that, unlike in the case of Article 7(3) responsibility, the information which was received by Horvat does not constitute notice evoking a duty to investigate.

61.      Finally, the Majority notes that, during the siege of Mostar and throughout the Indictment period, Horvat attended Collegium meetings which were intended to facilitate the exchange of information and were attended by the heads of the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the Operational Staff Sector. In reviewing the minutes from the Collegium
meetings, I note that not once is there any mention of the commission of crimes by the HVO. The evidence therefore does not support a finding that these meetings provided Horvat with actual knowledge that the HVO had committed crimes or was likely to commit crimes in Mostar.
(b) Diplomatic Cables

62.      The Majority relies on various diplomatic cables sent to the HR Mission as proof that Horvat knew that the HVO was committing crimes in Mostar. I respectfully disagree with the Majority on this point. It is first imperative to recall that the cables tendered into evidence can be classified into two categories: cables that were copied directly to Horvat; and those that were not. I acknowledge that Horvat may have been aware of some of these diplomatic cables, because he was directly copied on them. However, I do not accept the conclusion of the Majority that Horvat had knowledge of those cables sent to the HR leadership on which he was not copied. I further acknowledge that the information contained in those cables on which he was copied may have been sufficient to create a general awareness that abuses were occurring in BiH. However, in my view, the few cables on which Horvat was directly copied were insufficient to provide Horvat with knowledge that the HVO either had committed crimes or was likely to commit crimes in Mostar.

63.      While Horvat may have been copied on many cables by HR missions around the world, the Trial Chamber has evidence of only two diplomatic cables on which Horvat was directly copied concerning Mostar. I am of the view that the information contained within those cables was insufficient to have given Horvat actual knowledge of the HVO’s role in committing crimes in
Mostar.

64.      The first cable, sent by the HR’s UN Mission and copied on Horvat, referred to international concern over attacks on civilians in Mostar, and attributed responsibility for the escalation of the situation to “Bosnian Croats” generally. As multiple UN resolutions and other documents admitted into evidence made reference to “Bosnian Croat paramilitary” units when discussing the commission of crimes, the omission of a specific reference to the HVO in this cable leaves open the possibility that Horvat would have understood it to be implicating paramilitary
units, or other forces outside the HVO, for the alleged attacks on civilians. The second cable on which Horvat was copied, also prepared by the HR’s UN Mission, focused simply upon the general military situation in Mostar, describing “sniper activities and artillery attacks” without making any allegations regarding war crimes or specific perpetrators. 

65.      The Majority also relies upon diplomatic communications on which Horvat was not directly copied. A diplomatic cable sent from the HR Mission in London to the HV General Staff accused the Western media of “widely manipulating the latest massacre of civilians in Mostar” to promote air strikes against Croatian positions after Markale I, and further noted that the UK Defense Minister had stressed that there was not yet enough information to conclusively identify the perpetrators of
the attack. An earlier cable sent by the HR Mission in London simply noted that British officials
opposed the continued bombardment of Mostar. As there is no evidence that Horvat ever read or received these cables, they form an improper evidentiary basis upon which to infer any type of knowledge. Furthermore, as these diplomatic cables fail to specifically discuss the commission of crimes by the HVO, I find that even if Horvat had read them, they would not establish as the only reasonable inference that he had actual knowledge that the HVO had committed or was likely to commit crimes during the siege of Mostar.
(c) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Mostar

66.      The mere existence of UN reports and resolutions which discussed the events occurring in Mostar was not, in my view, sufficient to provide Horvat with actual knowledge of any allegations of criminal acts committed by the HVO. First, as I noted above regarding the documentation of the
international community generally, Horvat cannot be presumed to have knowledge of this type of evidence and I recall my previous finding that the evidence does not support the conclusion that Horvat was in possession of these reports. 

67.      Furthermore, even if Horvat was in possession of the UN reports and resolutions, the information contained therein does not support the conclusion that Horvat would have had actual knowledge of HVO criminal conduct in Mostar. With the exception of UNSC Resolution 859, which does not implicate any specific perpetrators, the resolutions and reports refer only generally to war crimes and fail to specifically link any allegations of criminal conduct with the HVO. In fact, a large number of the UN documents in question attribute the commission of war crimes to unidentified “paramilitary” groups, while the HVO and the HV are not implicated in these reports. Other reports, instead of detailing specific allegations of criminal conduct and attributing such conduct to the HVO, focused generally on the effect of the military campaign on the humanitarian situation on the ground. 

68.      The reports issued by Mazowiecki also did not contain sufficient detail from which to conclude which group was responsible for the alleged crimes in Mostar. These reports either referred to crimes committed by “Croat soldiers” and “Croat mercenaries” without identifying their organisational affiliation, or expressly declined to assign specific culpability for the criminal
conduct described therein. 
(d) Media Reports

69.      The Majority states that Horvat was “generally informed of what was being reported in the international and Croatian press” and that because attacks on Muslim civilians in Mostar were widely reported, the only reasonable inference is that Horvat knew of these allegations. The Majority cites press articles from Borba, NIN, and other publications. However, nothing in the evidentiary record demonstrates that these particular documents or, for that matter, any media
describing HVO violence against Muslim civilians were provided to Horvat as part of his press clippings. I am therefore not persuaded that the evidence establishes as the only reasonable inference that Horvat had actual knowledge that his assistance would aid in the probable commission of crimes by the HVO in Mostar.
4. Horvat’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the HVO in Ahmići

70.     	I respectfully disagree with the finding of the Majority that Horvat knew that his assistance would aid in the probable commission of crimes by the HVO in Ahmići.
(a) Statements made by Horvat

71.      The Majority notes that, contemporaneous with the HVO takeover of the enclave, the Užice Corps Commander informed Horvat of a large group of Muslims escaping from Kiseljak and crossing the Neretva River into Croatia. The commander then informed him that the Užice MUP, a unit of the
HV, wanted to kill refugees and that he had contacted Tuđman to prevent this. While this communication certainly made Horvat awre that something significant was happening in the area of Kiseljak, the commander’s declaration that he had communicated with Tuđman gave Horvat reason to believe that any danger the Užice Corps may have posed to the Muslim civilians had been eliminated. Furthermore, there was nothing in this communication which would have informed
Horvat that the HVO was perpetrating crimes in the area at that time.
(b) Intelligence Reports

72.      I acknowledge that Horvat received periodic “situation reports” from the HVO, that the HVO intelligence organs sent regular reports to the HV General Staff, and that he received daily reports from his own Security and Intelligence Administrations. None of this evidence actually references the commission of criminal acts by the HVO.

73.      All of the reports issued by the HV General Staff Intelligence Administration focused exclusively upon military activities of the Muslim and HVO forces in the region; nowhere in these reports is there any mention of the commission of crimes by the HVO, either before or after the fall of Ahmići. It is also important to note that the movements of HVO forces were reported with far less specificity than those of the Muslim forces. 

74.      Prior to the takeover of Ahmići, the reports Horvat and the HV General Staff received from the HVO primarily described ABiH military activity and movements. The only reference to allegations of crimes tendered into evidence can be found in the following HVO Main Staff intelligence reports: a 18 May 1995 HVO report which described Muslim propaganda alleging HVO
operations against the Podrinje enclaves; and a 26 May 1995 report wherein the Muslim media alleged that there were large numbers of civilian victims in an effort to force additional NATO air strikes against the HVO. As both of these communications described the reports of crimes as either Muslim propaganda or self-serving allegations generated by Muslim media sources, they implied that the allegations should not be believed.
(c) Meetings with Members of the HVO

.75.     	The Majority notes that Horvat communicated with several HVO officers, including Petković, as crimes were occurring in Ahmići. Horvat also attended a lunch meeting with Petković, Gvero,
and others in Han Pijesak during the same period. There is no evidence, however, that the
commission of crimes by the HVO was discussed on any of these occasions. Therefore, these conversations cannot be used to support the inference that Horvat had actual knowledge of the crimes committed by the HVO in Ahmići.
(d) Diplomatic Cables

76.      I recall that a number of diplomatic cables concerning Ahmići were sent by the HR’s UN Mission and other diplomatic missions to the HR leadership, only some of which were copied directly to Horvat. I reach a similar conclusion with respect to the diplomatic cables which reference Ahmići as I did above for those related to Mostar. I will first address those cables copied directly on Horvat.

77.      A cable dated 12 July 1995, on which Horvat was copied, summarised the positions of various participants in a UNSC debate. The cable did not contain any specific factual findings of the UNSC with respect to any specific crime. Another cable, also dated 12 July 1995, is also inconclusive because, while it referred to the military situation on the ground by discussing missile attacks and to a general humanitarian crisis, there was no explicit discussion of crimes perpetrated by the HVO. While the cable does mention Petković by name, it is not in the context of the missile attacks, which are attributed more generally to “Bosnian Croats”. The cable also failed to provide any details regarding the damage or loss of life caused by the missile attacks, or the targets of these
attacks. Therefore, in the context of this cable, it would have been impossible for Horvat to conclusively ascertain what crimes, if any, were committed and by whom. Similarly, other cables on which Horvat was copied did not contain any detailed allegations of specific crimes committed by the HVO, but instead focused more generally on the humanitarian situation or the international media coverage of the events. Consequently, I respectfully disagree with the Majority’s conclusion that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that Horvat had actual knowledge that the HVO was committing crimes in Ahmići. In dubio pro reo.

78.      In addition, I recall my previous finding that any diplomatic cables on which Horvat was not directly copied cannot be indicative of whether or not Horvat had actual knowledge of the criminal
in conduct of the HVO. Therefore, any diplomatic cable discussing the events occurring in Ahmići, on which Horvat was not copied, cannot be used to infer actual knowledge on his part.

79.      Similar to my previous conclusions regarding the Mostar diplomatic cables, I respectfully hold that even if Horvat was aware of the contents of the diplomatic cables on which he was not copied, the information contained within these cables does not support the conclusion that Horvat would have had knowledge of the crimes charged with respect to Ahmići. While I acknowledge that the information contained within these cables would have been sufficient to make Horvat aware of the fact that crimes were generally occurring, the cables did not contain sufficient details that could have made Horvat aware of any involvement on the part of the HVO. For instance, many of
these diplomatic cables merely summarised various reports from the international media. Many of the reports referenced in these cables focused on the humanitarian situation on the ground and did not specifically reference war crimes or single out the HVO as the perpetrator of individual criminal acts, while one report even mentioned that the HR H-B leadership had pledged that civilians would not be harmed. 
(e) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in

80.      The Majority refers to UNSC statements, excerpts from UNSC meetings, and diplomatic communications on which Horvat was not copied to demonstrate that Horvat had knowledge that the HVO were committing crimes in Ahmići. I disagree with this conclusion. Horvat was not present at the UNSC meetings and there is simply no evidence to suggest that he
had knowledge of the contents of these meetings or of the UNSC resolutions adopted at these meetings.
(f) Media Reports

81.     	Regarding Horvat’s awareness of crimes committed in Ahmići, the Majority again relies
upon the existence of specific media reports, of which we have no evidence that Horvat ever received, in order to find that he had actual knowledge of crimes committed by the HVO. Branko Gajić’s testimony further diminishes the probability that these reports would have informed Horvat of HVO crimes. He stated that notices of media reports regarding possible HVO atrocities in Ahmići were disregarded because they did not represent a counter-intelligence issue. It is striking that the only testimony available to the Trial Chamber dealing directly with the dissemination of media reports regarding Ahmići through the HV intelligence apparatus
contradicts the inference drawn by the Majority.
5. Conclusion

82.      The Majority holds that the only reasonable inference supported by the evidence is that Horvat knew of the HVO’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH during his tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff.

83.      I am in agreement that the evidence shows that Horvat received alarming information alerting him to the fact that crimes may have been occurring during the war. In accordance with the jurisprudence on Article 7(1) responsibility, Horvat was under no obligation to investigate these allegations. The question, then, is whether it was highly probable that when Horvat provided assistance, he knew that the HVO would very likely use this assistance to commit crimes in Mostar and Ahmići. In this regard, I am of the view that the Majority erred in concluding that Horvat possessed the requisite knowledge.

84.      In my view, the largely circumstantial evidence presented to the Trial Chamber does not establish as the only reasonable inference that Horvat was aware of the commission of crimes by the HVO in Mostar and Ahmići during the period of his tenure as Chief of the HV General Staff. In fact, no knowledge on Horvat’s part, of crimes being committed in Mostar and Ahmići by the HVO, can reasonably be inferred from the entirety of the evidence admitted in this case.

85.      As a result, I am not persuaded that Ante Horvat is individually criminally responsible pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute for crimes committed in Mostar and Ahmići as charged
in Counts 1 to 4 and Counts 9 to 12 of the Indictment.
XIII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 5 TO 8

[Omitted. This dissent concerns only the characterization of superior liability under 7(3); all judges agreed on the outcome, however, and this part of the decision was not appealed.]


XIV. ANNEXES
A. ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
1. Pre-Trial Proceedings
(a) Surrender and Initial Appearance

1.    An initial indictment against Ante Horvat was confirmed by Judge Jean-Claude Antonetti on 24 February 2005 and unsealed on 7 March 2005. It charged Ante Horvat with five counts of violations of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute and eight counts of crimes against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute. Ante Horvat was charged with aiding and abetting the planning, preparation, or execution of the aforementioned crimes pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute and as a superior officer, with failure to prevent or punish the unlawful acts of his subordinates in the HV pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Statute. 

2.    Ante Horvat expressed his intention to voluntarily surrender and on 7 March 2005 he was transferred into the custody of the Tribunal. 

3.    Ante Horvat made his initial appearance before Trial Chamber III on 9 March 2005. He pleaded not guilty to all counts in the indictment. On 9 June 2005, Trial Chamber III granted the Defence request for provisional release of Ante Horvat. He returned to the UNDU in The Hague on 18 September 2008. 
(b) Amendments to the Indictment

4.    On 29 August 2005, Trial Chamber III ordered the Prosecution to amend the indictment. 

5.    On 26 	September 	2005, 	the 	Prosecution 	filed 	an 	amended 	indictment. On 12 December 2005, Trial Chamber III granted the Prosecution’s motion to further amend the indictment to correct a typographical error. 

6.    On 20 November 2006, Trial Chamber III invited the Prosecutor to propose means of reducing the scope of the indictment. On 4 December 2006, the Prosecution declined the Trial Chamber’s invitation. During a status conference held on 1 December 2006, the Prosecution indicated its preference to make two minor typographical amendments to the indictment of 26 September 2005 in conjunction with an order from Trial Chamber III to reduce the scope of the amended indictment. The Trial Chamber ultimately ordered the Prosecution not to lead evidence on “terror” in relation to the Mostar counts, only to lead evidence relating to the scheduled incidents that are listed in schedules A and B of the Amended Indictment and to reduce its witness list accordingly. 

7.    On 15 May 2007, Trial Chamber III allowed the proposed amendments to the amended indictment. On 13 September 2007, the Prosecution filed a second amended indictment. On 5 February 2008, the Prosecution filed a revised second amended indictment, which is the operative Indictment in this case. 
(c) Composition of the Trial Chamber

8.    The case was initially assigned to Trial Chamber III with Judge Patrick Robinson designated as pre-trial Judge. On 12 May 2006, Judges Krister Thelin and Frank Höpfel were assigned to the case to conduct pre-trial work. 

9.    On 20 March 2008, the case was reassigned to Trial Chamber I composed of Judges Alphons Orie, Christine Van den Wyngaert and Bakone Justice Moloto. On 26 March 2008, Judge Moloto was designated pre-trial Judge. On 29 May 2008, Judges Flavia Lattanzi and Michèle Picard were assigned as ad litem judges to the pre-trial proceedings. 

10.    On 2 October 2009, the President of the Tribunal ordered that the trial bench be composed of Judge Bakone Justice Moloto as Presiding Judge, Judge Pedro David and Judge Michèle Picard. 
(d) Counsel

11.    On 9 March 2005, the Registrar assigned Mr. Karim Khan as duty counsel to Ante Horvat. On 21 April 2005, Mr. James Castle was provisionally assigned as counsel for the Accused for a period of 120 days. On 15 August 2005, the Deputy Registrar issued a decision finding that the Accused was able to remunerate counsel in part and assigning Mr. Castle as his counsel permanently. 

12.    On 7 April 2006, Dušan Slijepčević was assigned as co-counsel. On 12 June 2006, Mr. Castle requested the withdrawal of Mr. Slijepčević. Mr. Slijepčević was withdrawn as co-counsel on 25 August 2006. On 25 April 2007, Novak Lukić was appointed as co-counsel. 

13.    On 29 July 2008, Mr. Castle was withdrawn as lead counsel and re-assigned as co-counsel for the Accused. On the same date Mr. Lukić was assigned as lead counsel and Mr. Guy-Smith was assigned as an additional co-counsel for the Accused. On 22 December 2008, Mr. Castle was withdrawn as co-counsel by the Deputy Registrar. 
(e) Preparations for Trial

14.    The Prosecution filed its Pre-Trial Brief on 23 February 2007. The Defence submitted its Pre-Trial Brief on 30 March 2007. 

15.    Pursuant to Rule 65 bis of the Rules, status conferences were held on 6 July 2005, 25 October 2005, 15 February 2006, 14 June 2006, 11 October 2006, 6 February 2007, 23 May 2007, 19 September 2007, 15 January 2008, 6 May 2008, 2 September 2008 and 24 September 2008. 

16.    At a status conference held on 6 May 2008, the Presiding Judge invited the Prosecution to present its case within nine months, allowing 540 hours for the Prosecution phase. 

17.    On 27 June 2008, Trial Chamber I ordered the Pre-Trial Conference to take place on 24 September 2008 and set the Opening Statement of the Prosecution to take place on 1 October 2008, followed on 2 October 2008 by the Opening Statement of the Defence and/or a statement of the Accused at that stage of the proceedings. On 23 September 2008, Trial Chamber I rescheduled the Pre-Trial Conference to take place on 1 October 2008, with Opening Statements to begin on the same date. 

18.    A Pre-Trial Conference pursuant to Rule 73 bis was held on 2 October 2008. The Trial Chamber granted the Prosecution 355 hours for the presentation of its evidence and set the number of witnesses to be called by the Prosecution at 150. 
2. Trial Proceedings

19.    The trial was held between 2 October 2008 and 31 March 2011. The Trial Chamber sat for 198 trial days.

20.    The Prosecution case commenced on 2 October 2008 and concluded on 25 January 2010. The Prosecution adduced evidence from 108 witnesses in total, of whom 35 testified viva voce. 37 witnesses gave evidence pursuant to Rule 92 ter. The evidence of three witnesses was admitted exclusively in written form pursuant to Rule 92 bis, one witness pursuant to Rule 71 and 11 pursuant to Rule 92 quater. Moreover, the Trial Chamber admitted the evidence of 21 witnesses pursuant to Rule 94 bis. 

21.    On 13 and 14 December 2008, witness Nikola Tošković gave evidence by deposition at his home pursuant to Rule 71. 

22.    Pursuant to Rule 73 ter, pre-Defence conferences were held on 29 January 2010 and 10 February 2010. 

23.    At the pre-Defence conference held on 10 February 2010, the Trial Chamber allocated the Defence 180 hours to present their case. 

24.    The Defence case commenced on 22 February 2010 with its Opening Statement and concluded on 11 January 2011. The Defence adduced evidence from 28 witnesses in total, of whom 21 testified viva voce. The evidence of three witnesses was admitted in written form pursuant to Rule 92 bis, three pursuant to Rule 92 quater and one pursuant to Rule 94 bis.

25.    On 4 March 2011, the Parties submitted their Final Briefs. The closing arguments took place between 28 March 2011 and 31 March 2011. 

26.    The Trial Chamber admitted a total of 3,797 exhibits into evidence; 2,945 exhibits were tendered by the Prosecution, 849 by the Defence and three by the Trial Chamber.
(a) Provisional Release

27.    On 17 December 2008, Ante Horvat was granted provisional release, to last from 22 December 2008 to 9 January 2009. He was again provisionally released between 9 and 17 April 2009, 25 July 2009 and 14 August 2009, 9 December 2009 and 14 January 2010, 23 July 2010 and 19 August 2010. The Trial Chamber nevertheless also denied several requests for provisional release. 
(b) Site Visit

28.    In accordance with Rule 4, the Trial Chamber and the Parties conducted an on-site visit to various locations in the Republic of Croatia and BiH between 21 and 26 June 2009. The Trial Chamber admitted proprio motu the record of the visit into evidence. 
B. ANNEX B – GLOSSARY
1. ICTY Judgements and DecisionsAleksovski Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-A, Judgement, 24 March 2000Aleksovski Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-T, Judgement, 25 June 1999Aleksovski February 1999 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-AR73, Decision on Prosecutor’s Appeal on Admissibility of Evidence, 16 February 1999Blagojević and Jokić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Vidoje Blagojević and Dragan Jokić, Case No. IT-02-60-A, Judgement, 9 May 2007Blagojević and Jokić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Vidoje Blagojević and Dragan Jokić, Case No. IT-02-60-T, Judgement, 17 January 2005Blaškić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-A, Judgement, 29 July 2004Blaškić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-T, Judgement, 3 March 2000Boškoski and Tarčulovski Appeal JudgementProsecutor 	v.	Ljube	Boškoski	and 	Johan Tarčulovski, Case No. IT-04-82-A, Judgement, 19 May 2010Boškoski and Tarčulovski Trial JudgementProsecutor 	v.	Ljube	Boškoski	and 	Johan Tarčulovski, Case No. IT-04-82-T, Judgement, 10 July 2008Brñanin Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Radoslav Brñanin, Case No. IT-99-36-A, Judgement, 3 April 2007Brñanin Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Radoslav Brñanin, Case No. IT-99-36-T, Judgement, 1 September 2004Čelebići Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Land`o, Case No. IT-96-21-A, Judgement, 20 February 2001Čelebići Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Land`o, Case No. IT-96-21-T, Judgement, 16 November 1998Delić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Rasim Delić, Case No. 04-83-T, 15 September 2008Černi Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Josip Černi, Case No. IT-03-72-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 18 July 2005Ćorić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Valentin Ćorić, Case No. IT-02-61-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 20 July 2005Blaškić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-96-22-A, Judgement, 7 October 1997Furund`ija Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Anto Furund`ija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-T, Judgement, 10 December 1998Galić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-A, Judgement, 30 November 2006Galić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-T, Judgement and Opinion, 5 December 2003Galić June 2002 Appeal Rule 92 bis(C) DecisionProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-AR73.2, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal Concerning Rule 92 bis(C), 7 June 2002Galić July 2002 Trial Expert Witnesses DecisionProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-T, Decision Concerning the Expert Witnesses Ewa Tabeau and Richard Philipps, 3 July 2002Gotovina et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Ante Gotovina, Ivan Čermak and Mladen 	Markač, 	Case 	No. 	IT-06-90-T, Judgement, 15 April 2011Had`ihasanović and Kubura Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-A, Judgement, 22 April 2008Had`ihasanović and Kubura Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-T, Judgement, 15 March 2006Had`ihasanović and Kubura Appeal Jurisdiction DecisionProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-AR72, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal Challenging Jurisdiction in Relation to Command Responsibility, 16 July 2003Halilović Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Sefer Halilović, Case No. IT-01-48-A, Appeal Judgement, 16 October 2007Halilović Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Sefer Halilović, Case No. IT-01-48-T, Judgement, 16 November 2005Haradinaj et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj, Case No. IT-04-84-A, Judgement, 19 July 2010Haraqija and Morina Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Astrit Haraqija and Bajrush Morina, 	Case 	No. 	IT-04-84-R77.4-A, Judgement, 23 July 2009Jelisić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No. IT-95-10-T, Judgement, 14 December 1999M. Jokić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case No. IT-01-42/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 30 August 2005M. Jokić Sentencing Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case No. IT-01-42/1-S, Sentencing Judgement, 18 March 2004Kordić and Čerkez Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case No. IT-95-14/2-A, Judgement, 17 December 2004Kordić 	and 	Čerkez	Appeal 	Judgement Corrigendum of 26 January 2005Prosecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case 	No. 	IT-95-14/2-A, 	“Corrigendum 	to Judgement of 17 December 2004”, 26 January 2005Kordić and Čerkez Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case No. IT-95-14/2-T, Judgement, 26 February 2001Krajišnik Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Borislav Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-A, Judgement, 17 March 2009Krajišnik Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Borislav Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-T, Judgement, 27 September 2006Krnojelac Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-A, Judgement, 17 September 2003Krnojelac Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-T, Judgement, 15 March 2002Krstić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-A, Judgement, 19 April 2004Krstić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-T, Judgement, 2 August 2001Kunarac et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač and Zoran Horvat, Case No. IT-96-23-A & IT-96-23/1-A, Judgement, 12 June 2002Kunarac et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač and Zoran Horvat, Case No. IT-96-23-T & IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement, 22 February 2001Kupreškić et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić, Mirjan Kupreškić, Vlato Kupreškić, Drago Josipović and Vladimir Šantić, Case No. IT-95-16-A, Judgement, 23 October 2001Kupreškić et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić, Mirjan Kupreškić, Vlato Kupreškić, Drago Josipović, Dragan Papić and Vladimir Šantić, Case No. IT-95-16-T, Judgement, 14 January 2000Kvočka et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Mlado Radić, Zoran Žigić and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-A, Judgement, 28 February 2005Kvočka et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Milojica Kos, Mlado Radić, Zoran Žigić and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-T, Judgement, 2 November 2001Limaj et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala and Isak Musliu, Case No. IT-03-66-T, Judgement, 30 November 2005Martić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-A, Judgement, 8 October 2008Martić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-T, Judgement, 12 June 2007Martić September 2006 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-AR73.2, Decision on Appeal against the Trial Chamber’s Decision on the Evidence of Witness Josip Černi, 14 September 2006Milutinović et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Milutinović, Nikola Šainović, Dragoljub Ojdanić, Nebojša Pavković, Vladimir Lazarević and Streten Lukić, Case No. IT-05-87-T, Judgement, 26 February 2009Mrđa Trial Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Darko Mrđa, Case No. IT-02-59- S, Sentencing Judgement, 31 March 2004Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mile Mrkšić and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. IT-95-13/1-A, Judgement, 5 May 2009Mrkšić et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Mile Mrkšić, Miroslav Radić and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. IT-95-13/1-T, Judgement, 27 September 2007Naletilić and Martinović Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mladen Naletilić and Vinko Martinović, Case No. IT-98-34-A, Judgement, 3 May 2006D. Nikolić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dragan Nikolić, Case No. IT-94-2-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 4 February 2005M. Nikolić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Nikolić, Case No. IT-02-60/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 8 March 2006Orić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-A, Judgement, 03 July 2008Orić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-T, Judgement, 30 June 2006Popović et al. January 2008 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-AR73.2, Decision on Joint Defence Interlocutory Appeal Concerning the Status of Richard Butler as an Expert Witness, 30 January 2008Popović et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-T, Judgement, 10 June 2010Popović et al. December 2007 Trial DecisionProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-T, Decision on Admissibility of Intercepted Communications, 7 December 2007Prlić et al. November 2007 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Jadranko Prlić, Bruno Stojić, Slobodan Praljak, Milivoj Pektović, Valentin Ćorić and Berislav Pušić, Case No. 04-74-AR73.6, Decision on Appeals against Decision Admitting Transcript of Jadranko Prlić’s Questioning into Evidence, 23 November 2007Prlić et al. April 2009 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Jadranko Prlić, Bruno Stojić, Slobodan Praljak, Milivoj Pektović, Valentin Ćorić and Berislav Pušić, Case No. 04-74-AR73.15, Decision on Jadranko Prlić’s Interlocutory Appeal against the Decision regarding Supplement to the Accused Prlić’s Rule 84 bis Statement, 20 April 2009A. Roso Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Ante Roso, Case No. IT-98-29/1-A, Judgement, 12 November 2009A. Roso Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Ante Roso, Case No. IT-98-29/1-T, Judgement, 12 December 2007A. Roso June 2007 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Ante Roso, Case No. IT-98-29/1-AR73.1, Decision on Interlocutory Appeals Against Trial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts and Prosecution’s Catalogue of Agreed Facts, 26 June 2007Simić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Blagoje Simić, Case No. IT-95-9-A, Judgement, 28 November 2006Stakić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milomir Stakić, Case No. IT-97-24-A, Judgement, 22 March 2006Stakić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milomir Stakić, Case No. IT-97-24-T, Judgement, 31 July 2003Stanišić and Župljanin February 2011 Trial DecisionProsecutor v. Mićo Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin, Case No. IT-08-91-T, Decision Granting in Part the Prosecution’s Bar Table Motion and the Prosecution’s 	Supplementall Bar Table Motion, 1 February 2011 Strugar Appeal Judgement	Prosecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-A, Judgement, 17 July 2008Strugar Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-T, Judgement, 31 January 2005Strugar November 2002 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Miodrag Jokić and others, Case No. IT-01-42-AR72, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal, 22 November 2002Tadić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Judgement, 15 July 1999Tadić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Opinion and Judgement, 7 May 1997Tadić 	October 	1995 	Appeal 	Jurisdiction DecisionProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-AR72, Decision on the Defence Motion for Interlocutory Appeal on Jurisdiction, 2 October 1995Vasiljević Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-A, Judgement, 25 February 2004Vasiljević Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-T, Judgement, 29 November 2002
2. ICTR Judgements and DecisionsAkayesu Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No. ICTR-96-4-T, Judgement, 2 September 1998Karemera et al. June 2006 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Edouard Karemera, Mathieu Ngirumpatse and Joseph Nzirorera, Case No. ICTR-98-44-AR73(C), Decision on Prosecutor’s Interlocutory Appeal of Decision on Judicial Notice, 16 June 2006Karera Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Francois Karera, Case No. ICTR-01-74-A, Judgement, 2 February 2009Kayishema and Ruzindana Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Clement Kayishema and Obed Ruzindana, Case No. ICTR-95-1-A, Judgement, 1 June 2001Kayishema and Ruzindana Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Clement Kayishema and Obed Ruzindana, Case No. ICTR-95-1-T, Judgement, 21 May 1999Muvunyi Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Tharcisse Muvunyi, Case No. ICTR-2000-55A-T, Judgement, 12 September 2006Nahimana et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza and Hassan Ngeze, Case No. ICTR-99-52-A, Judgement, 28 November 2007Nahimana et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza and Hassan Ngeze, Case No. ICTR-99-52-T, Judgement, 3 December 2003Ndindabahizi Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Emmanuel Ndindabahizi, Case No. ICTR-01-71-A, Judgement, 16 January 2007Ntagerura et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Andre Ntagerura, Emmanuel Bagambiki and Samuel Imanishimwe, Case No. ICTR-99-46-A, Judgement, 7 July 2006Ntakirutimana and Ntakirutimana Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Elizaphan Ntakirutimana and Gerard Ntakirutimana, Case No. ICTR-96-10-A & ICTR-96-17-A, Judgement,13 December 2004Seromba Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Athanase Seromba, Case No. ICTR-2001-66-A, Judgement, 12 March 2008Simba Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Aloys Simba, Case No. ICTR-01-76-A, Judgement, 27 November 2007
3. Other JurisprudenceHigh Command CaseUnited States v. Wilhelm von Leeb et al., Judgement, 27 October 1948, Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law No. 10, Vol. XIHostage CaseUnited States v. Wilhelm List et al., Judgement, 19 February 1948, Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law No. 10, Vol. XIThreat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, ICJ Advisory OpinionLegality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion of 8 July 1996, I.C.J. Reports 1996Tamba Brima et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy Kamara and Santigie Borbor Kanu, Case No. SCSL-04-16-T, 20 June 2007Tokyo JudgementJudgement of the International Military Tribunal for the Far East, Tokyo, 12 November 1948, Vol. I
4. Table of other Authorities
(a) Domestic LawsSFRY Criminal CodeCriminal Code of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, adopted by the SFRY Assembly at the session of the Federal Council on 28 September 1976; published in the official Gazette of the SFRY No. 44 of 8 October 1976; correction made in the Official Gazette, SFRY No. 36 of 15 July 1977; entry into force 1 July 1977; after the dissolution of the SFRY in 1992 the Code remained in force, with some modifications, and was renamed the Criminal Code of the HR.
(b) International Legal Instruments and CommentariesAdditional Protocol IProtocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, 8 June 1977Additional Protocol IIProtocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts, 8 June 1977Common Article 3Article 	3 	common 	to 	the 	four 	Geneva Conventions of 1949Geneva Convention IVGeneva 	Convention 	(IV) 	relative 	to 	the Protection of Civil Persons in Time of war, 12 August 1949ICRC Commentary on Additional ProtocolsCommentary on the Additional Protocols of 8 June 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 (Geneva: ICRC, 1987)
5. Table of Short FormsABiHArmy of Bosnia and HerzegovinaAccusedAnte HorvatAhmići Adjudicated FactsTrial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution’s Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Ahmići Crime Base, 22 September 2008Ahmići Agreed FactsTrial 	Chamber’s 	Decision 	in 	Respect 	of Ahmići Agreed Facts, 19 August 2009APCArmoured Personnel CarriersAPZB NOAutonomous 	Province 	of 	Western 	Bosnia National DefenceBiHBosnia and HerzegovinaCity MarketIndoor City Market of MostarCAOCroatian Autonomous DistrictCSDisabling Chemical AgentCSBSecurity Service CentreCDSCroatian Democratic PartyBCSThe Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian LanguageBiHBosnia and Her`egovinaD-2Type of Diesel OilDNADeoxyribo Nucleic AcidDefence Adjudicated Facts ITrial Chamber Decision on Defence Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts, 4 May 2010Defence Adjudicated Facts IITrial Chamber Decision on Second Defence Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts, 2 August 2010Defece Agreed FactsTrial Chamber Decision in Respect of Joint Submission of Agreed Facts Proposed by the Defence, 29 June 2010Defence Final BriefMr. Horvat’s Final Brief (confidential), 4 March 2011Neretva WolvesPodrinje Detachment or Džokeri Unit Manoeuvre DetachmentDutchBatDutch Battalion of UNPROFORECEuropean CommunityECOSOCUnited Nations Economic and Social CouncilECtHREuropean Court of Human RightsEx. DxxxxDefence exhibitEx. PxxxxProsecution exhibitExsExhibitsFABFugasno Avio BombesFn.FootnoteFRYFederal Republic of YugoslaviaGŠMain Staff (predecessor to the General Staff)HDZCroatian Democratic UnionHKHerzegovina CorpsHVCroatian ArmyHVOCroatian Defence CouncilHR H-BHravatska Republika Herceg-BosnaIBKEastern Bosnia CorpsICFYInternational 	Conference 	on 	the 	former YugoslaviaICJInternational Court of JusticeICRCInternational Committee of the Red CrossICTRInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States, between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994IFORImplementation Force (NATO-led multinational force serving in BiH)IHLInternational Humanitarian LawIKMForward Command PostJNAYugoslav People’s ArmyKDZAnti-Bomb-SquadKgKilogramKKKozluk SiteKSJ (SUC)Special Units CorpsKSZDepartment for Forensic and Anti-TerrorismMODMinistry of DefenceMostar Adjudicated Facts ITrial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution’s Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts Concerning Mostar, 26 June 2008Mostar Adjudicated Facts IITrial Chamber’s Decision on Second Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Mostar Crime Base, 17 September 2008Mostar Adjudicated Facts IIITrial Chamber’s Decision on Third Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Mostar Crime Base, 12 January 2010Mostar CorpsCorps District MostarMUPMinistry of the Interior in Hrvatska Republika Herceg-BosnaNATONorth Atlantic Treaty OrganisationNCONon-Commissioned OfficerNGŠChief of the General StaffNKNova KasabaNVOWeapons and Military EquipmentOPObservation PostOTP/ProsecutionOffice of the Prosecutorp.PageppPagespara.Paragraphparas.ParagraphsPCPersonnel CentrePJPSpecial Police UnitsProsecution Final BriefProsecution Final Trial Brief (confidential), 4 March 2011PTT BuildingFormer 	Postal, 	Telephone 	and 	Telegragh Building 	that 	harboured 	the 	UNMO headquartersRulesRules of Procedure 	and Evidence of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (IT/32/Rev.45)SBCSlavonia-Baranja Corps in the SVKSDAParty of Democratic ActionSDC (VSO)Supreme Defence CouncilSFRYSocialist Federative Republic of YugoslaviaSMOFederal Ministry of DefenceSSNOFederal Secretariat of People’s DefenceT.Transcript pageTEZTotal Exclusion ZoneTGTactical GroupTNTTri Nitro TolueneTOTerritorial Defence forcesTribunalInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991TRZTechnical Overhaul CompanyUNUnited NationsUNGAUnited Nations General AssemblyUNHCRUnited 	Nations 	High 	Commissioner 	for RefugeesUNHQUnited Nations HeadquartersUNMOUnited Nations Military ObserverUNPASUnited Nations Protected AreasUNPROFORUnited Nations Protection ForceUNPROFOR G-2United Nations Protection Force Intelligence OfficerUNSCUnited Nations Security CouncilUSAUnited States of AmericaVBRModified Aerial Bomb with Multiple Rocket LaunchersVMAMilitary Medical Academy Hospital in Zagreb