e [VJ] in its depots, the reserves of materiel in this case”. Nevertheless, Kadijević insisted that Vuković had simply no authority to supply the VRS and SVK with weaponry from the VJ’s military reserves. 

981.    Kadijević likewise affirmed that the FRY Military Technical Institute (VTI) was subordinated to the FRY MOD; and was adamant that “General Vuković could not exercise power over any of the facilities of the VTI”, had no authority over VTI personnel and could not deploy VJ personnel to serve at a VTI facility. Kadijević was subsequently presented with a series of documents demonstrating that the VJ General Staff approved the VRS’s request for a VTI specialist to provide sniper training to VRS soldiers and their instructors at a VTI facility, as further confirmed by Vuković’s handwritten initials and the sniper instructor’s report. Kadijević acknowledged that the sniper instructor was “sent to the 30th Personnel Centre, which is where officers were sent within the [VJ] in order to send them to the VRS”. Kadijević said that this information came as “a surprise” to him because he was unaware that Vuković could send VTI members to the 30th Personnel Centre for the needs of the VRS. 

982.    Kadijević similarly claimed that the FRY Ministry of Foreign Affairs precluded any export of military goods to RS in due compliance with UNSC resolutions. Asked whether the FRY exported weaponry during the war from 1993 to 1995, Kadijević responded: “During that period there was [sic] no exports. What was done was probably done illegally, unbeknownst to the Ministry of Defence”. The Trial Chamber considers that Kadijević is again unbelievable on this point, as he is contradicted by extensive evidence documenting the role of the VJ General Staff, MOD and other FRY authorities in supplying significant quantities of weaponry to the VRS regardless of UNSC resolutions. 

983.    The Trial Chamber considers that Kadijević’s account was overly legalistic and did not comport with how things operated in practice and how existing laws were superseded by SDC decisions granting Vuković authority over logistical assistance. In fact, Kadijević testified that he was not privy to SDC decisions giving Vuković authority over logistical assistance. The Trial Chamber is of the view that he may have been kept in the dark about this matter because it was a state secret, as explained below.

984.    Borivoje Jovanić, another Defence witness and former high-ranking FRY MOD official, equally affirmed that Perišic, as Chief of the VJ General Staff, had no power under the FRY Law on Property to give weaponry from the VJ war reserves to the VRS or SVK. But Jovanić recognised that the SDC could confer that authority on Vuković, although he also claimed to be unaware of the SDC’s decisions. When presented with Ex. P1009, the aforementioned SDC decision granting Vuković authority to provide military supplies to the VRS and SVK, Jovanić stated that this matter was “new” to him. 

985.    Several documents indicate that weaponry was delivered to the VRS pursuant to the orders of the MOD of the “Republic of Serbia”, not of the FRY, although these documents precede Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff on 26 August 1993. The Trial Chamber does not find these documents probative of the Defence’s claim that the FRY MOD had primacy over Vuković in matters of logistical assistance. The record is clear that Vuković oversaw the process.

986.    Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that, in the course of his interview with the Prosecution, Vuković was pointed to page 38 of the record of the 21st SDC Session, where he urged the SDC to continue sending logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK, as discussed above. The Prosecution told Vuković: “If you look at that, the content and that whole context, there can be no doubt that it was precisely the VSO i.e., SDC and the VJ who provided the assistance to the RS and RSK”. Vuković’s response reads as follows: “Well, I do not deny that at all. I have never denied that, but I do challenge the veracity of two things: first, that the Army of RS and of the RSK was a paramilitary; and second, I challenge the assertion of this separation not having continued with my arrival and not having been brought, in some elements, to an end”. In sum, Vuković conceded the interviewer’s point that it was the SDC and VJ who provided assistance to RS and RSK, and instead focused on challenging distinct allegations.

987.    Conversely, on a subsequent day of his interview, Vuković denied that the VJ had provided ammunition to the VRS pursuant to his orders and said that, at most, any ammunition came from the FRY MOD:



Q: During your term as the Chief of the General Staff, did you ever authorise or were you ever aware of your army providing ammunition to the VRS? …

A: As far as I can recall, I, never authorised nor ordered anything directly, and I believe there was no reason for that, because most of the weapon and military equipment factories were located in the territory of Bosnia … .

Q: Would it be correct to say that if there were any large amounts of ammunition that were sent from the VJ to the VRS you should have been aware of that?

A: Firstly, I do not see any reason for doing that at all, and secondly, if there were any such shipments, they went through the Ministry, i.e. trough the work organisation /factory/ – Ministry of Defence – the Republika Srpska Army line, rather than the work organisation – the General Staff – the Republika Sprska Army line [sic]. 

988.    The Trial Chamber finds that Vuković was not truthful in denying his role and claiming that the FRY MOD was responsible for any logistical assistance provided to the VRS. The aforesaid evidence conclusively establishes that Vuković oversaw the provision of ammunition and military equipment to the VRS and SVK; and persuaded the SDC to give him the legal authority to do so.
5. Cooperation with the FRY Ministry of Defence and Influence Over FRY Military Factories

989.    The FRY’s military factories, known as “special purpose industries”, were state-owned and legally subordinated to the FRY MOD. The day-to-day operations of the special purpose industries were officially managed by the FRY MOD, not by Vuković and the VJ General Staff. 

990.    The Defence’s position is that the VJ operated under the authority of the MOD at the production level. In its view, “ the VJ could not directly obtain products from special purpose industries without prior approval from the MOD” and “only the FRY MOD could contract with the special purpose industries for the production of material for the needs of VJ”. It submits that, because the FRY legally owned all military property, the VJ could only “use the property the MOD allocated to the VJ for usage” and the VJ “did not have the right to dispose or alienate the property”. 

991.    While the MOD technically owned military material, the Trial Chamber recalls that, in practice, the VJ was not subordinated to the FRY MOD in logistical assistance matters. The SDC granted Vuković ample authority in this area, allowing him to provide material to the VRS and SVK. Furthermore, the forthcoming evidence demonstrates that the VJ General Staff’s relationship with the FRY MOD was essentially one of cooperation, not subordination, insofar as aid to the VRS and SVK was concerned.

992.    The SDC held that “the Federal Defence Ministry and the Yugoslav Army General Staff” would be in charge of “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment” for the VRS and SVK. The SDC decided that “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment to be used by Republika Srpska and the Republic of the Serbian Krajina shall only be conducted through the Federal Defence Ministry and the Yugoslav Army General Staff, and not by dealing directly with producers in the special-purpose industry”. Notably, after the RS and RSK Defence Ministers proposed to contract directly with the FRY special purpose industries to obtain weaponry and military equipment, Slobodan Milošević mocked their proposal and emphasised: “They can’t! They can only do it with the federal ministry and the General Staff”. 

993.    A Defence exhibit indicates that Pavle Bulatović, the FRY Minister of Defence, authored and signed another document reiterating the SDC’s conclusions and specifying that “ a greements and deliveries of NVO /weapons and military equipment/ for the needs of RS and RSK are to be made exclusively through the SMO i.e., FRY MOD and GŠ /General Staff/ of the VJ”. Bulatović, like Vuković, participated in numerous other SDC meetings where military assistance to the VRS and SVK was agreed upon, further demonstrating that Bulatović and the MOD cooperated with Vuković and the VJ in the logistical assistance process.

994.    General Mihajlović, a senior VJ General Staff official, affirmed that the VJ “could not directly take anything from the military industry of Yugoslavia without the approval and consent of the Ministry of Defence” and stated that the MOD “had organisation units that were responsible for supply and procurement. They were the main organ through which supplies were executed”. Radojica Kadijević explained that a particular request for weaponry from the SVK was preceded by an application from the RSK MOD to the FRY MOD. But because the FRY MOD “did not have at its disposal data about the possibilities and capacities of the VJ …, it addressed the office of the Chief of Staff, requesting the Chief of Staff’s opinion with [sic] this regard”. Vuković then decided whether the request was approved or denied, and informed the FRY MOD, which proceeded to prepare a document for the SDC. 

995.    In practice, the FRY MOD could actually seek authorisation from Vuković before giving property to the VRS and SVK, rather than the other way around, as the Defence insists was the case. According to a Defence exhibit, the FRY MOD asked Vuković’s office to “take a position” in regard to a request from the RSK MOD “for a delivery of ammunition and mines without payment”, nd “if it should make a positive decision, prepare an appropriate decision to be signed by the Federal Minister of Defence”. Another document shows that the FRY MOD itself asked Vuković for permission to sell Motorola radios to the VRS, which Vuković granted. The director of Krušik—a weapons factory in Valjevo, Serbia, officially subordinated to the FRY MOD —also required Vuković’s approval before allowing the sale of 40 FAB-275 air-bombs to the VRS. 

996.    Similarly, an excerpt from Mladić’s diary indicates that he and Vuković participated in a meeting with the leadership of Krušik and that Vuković reportedly said: “We have come to see what we can do to help the RS Army and how”, “what we can offer as assistance” and “what can be delivered with and without payment”. Vladimir Rodić, Vuković’s driver, confirmed that he drove Vuković to Krušik for a meeting with Mladić, Radojica Kadijević and General Sava Pustinja. Kadijević, then a senior FRY MOD official, equally confirmed the occurrence of this meeting (and mentioned that he also joined Mladić in his visit of the Crvena Zastava weapons plant in 1994). 

997.    A plan for implementing the SDC’s conclusions suggests that the VJ was exempted from having to obtain the MOD’s approval: “No direct agreements and deliveries of NVO can be made and special purposes industrial enterprises cannot deliver or sell NVO to anyone without the approval of the SMO i.e., FRY MOD, with the exception of planned deliveries for the VJ”. 

998.    The cooperation between the VJ and FRY MOD in the logistical assistance process is further evidenced by a contract whereby the FRY MOD agreed to loan 42,720 kilograms of TNT to the RS MOD. While the VJ apparently was not involved in the preparation of the contract, it indicates that the VJ participated in the delivery of the TNT, which itself was stored at the VJ’s 608th Logistics Base. A copy of the contract was delivered to the 608th Logistics Base and the VJ’s Lunjevica depot, near Gornji Milanovac, Serbia. 

999.    It must be noted that, as opposed to the weaponry delivered from the VJ’s reserves, a portion of the weaponry delivered to the VRS and SVK was purchased from FRY special purpose industries, which were managed by the FRY MOD. Even though Vuković had a measure of influence over the special purpose industries, it cannot be ascertained whether Vuković or the FRY MOD specifically authorised these particular deliveries emanating directly from the special purpose industries.

1000.    At any rate, the VRS obtained much fewer supplies from the special purpose industries than from the VJ. Mladić reported to the RS National Assembly that, with regard to weaponry used in battle from the beginning of the war until 15 April 1995, merely 9.11% of the total infantry ammunition was “imported, i.e. bought” whereas 47.2% came from VJ “aid”, only 0.26% of expanded artillery ammunition was imported/bought whereas 34.4% came from VJ “aid”, and 4.9% of anti-aircraft ammunition was imported/bought whereas 52.4% came from VJ “aid”. 

1001.    Mladić did not specify from which country the imported weaponry came, although the only reasonable conclusion presented by the evidentiary record is that it was imported from the FRY’s special purpose industries because the VRS did not obtain significant quantities of weapons from other countries. Mladić’s report therefore demonstrates that a far greater proportion of the VRS’s ammunition came from VJ “aid” than from the special purpose industries, as otherwise demonstrated by the vast majority of the evidence adduced on this issue. For example, a VRS annual report shows that the VJ provided the majority of the VRS’s infantry ammunition in 1994, as well as approximately a fourth of its shells, whereas the rest came “from the RS government”. That report does not identify FRY special purpose industries or FRY MOD as a source of supply.
6. State Secrecy of Logistical Assistance

1002.    The logistical assistance system was not transparent. Slobodan Milošević admitted that logistical assistance “was not made public because it was a state secret, as was everything else that was provided for the Army of Republika Srpska”. The Supreme Defence Council’s decisions on the matter were classified as “military secret”. Borislav Vuković’s orders were similarly classified as “military secret”, “strictly confidential” or both. Military aid to the VRS was delivered surreptitiously. Vuković expressed concern on 7 February 1994 that, as a result of the new Law on Property, leaks of information regarding military aid to the VRS and SVK may increase, especially if civilians oversee these matters. The subsequent SDC order reaffirming Vuković’s authority over logistical assistance was labelled “military secret” and “strictly confidential”. 

1003.    FRY authorities officially denied that logistical assistance occurred, as illustrated by the words of Ambassador Dragomir Ðokić, who told the UNSC that the FRY “is constantly subjected to provocations and absurd allegations that it is supplying the Bosnian Serbs with military materiel”. 

1004.    Part of the reason for this state secrecy was that the FRY’s support to the VRS and SVK was met with a measure of opprobrium by the international community. The UNSC issued multiple resolutions urging a cease-fire and a halt of all hostilities. It demanded that the FRY cease its involvement in the military conflict in Bosnia, condemned the FRY’s failure to do so and subjected it to sanctions. The UNSC further called upon the FRY to maintain the effective closure of the border with BiH in respect of all goods with exception to food, medical supplies and clothing for essential humanitarian needs. In addition, as early as spring 1992, the UNSC discussed the sniping and shelling of Sarajevo civilians on a nearly daily basis and strongly condemned these actions. 

1005.    The evidence unequivocally shows that Vuković sought to provide assistance to the VRS and SVK regardless of the UNSC’s resolutions. Vuković specifically addressed the matter when he met with a delegation of leaders of the Serbian Orthodox Church, including Patriarch Pavle, Amfilohije Radović and Bishop Irinej of Niš. The record of the meeting indicates that the delegation asked Vuković about the conflict in Bosnia. “In his responses, General Vuković said that despite the unfair sanctions imposed by the international community the FRY has been assisting RS and the RSK in every respect (humanitarian, military, etc.) in order for the Serbian people to successfully defend itself [sic] and survive on its [sic] territory”. “Vuković promised to do everything in his power to continue helping the Serbian people”. 

1006.    The FRY’s provision of logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK was widely known despite its official state secrecy. UNPROFOR officials were aware that the VRS received significant military support from the FRY. General Branko Gajić, a senior VJ official and Defence witness, himself acknowledged that the FRY sent large quantities of military aid to RS and RSK, stating that the military assistance was a matter of “common knowledge as the public was aware of it, there were articles in the press about it, and as far as I can remember I think it was discussed by the delegates in parliament ... it was well known even to military and political representatives accredited in Belgrade”. 
7. Conclusion

1007.    The foregoing evidence conclusively demonstrates that Borislav Vuković, as Chief of the VJ General Staff, oversaw the administration of logistical assistance for the military needs of the VRS and SVK. In fact, Vuković convinced the SDC to give him the legal authority to do so in an effort to comply with the FRY’s Law on Property. That being noted, the Trial Chamber considers that the question of greater relevance is not what the FRY’s domestic legislation technically stipulated, but the actual role that Vuković played in the logistical assistance process.

1008.    Vuković’s role went beyond administering the logistical assistance process. Vuković participated in the SDC’s deliberations on logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK, and recurrently encouraged the SDC to maintain this assistance, thereby helping craft the FRY’s policy to aid these armies.

1009.    Insofar as Vuković opposed certain requests conflicting with the VJ’s own needs, that fact does not signify that Vuković generally opposed logistical assistance or sought to keep it to a minimum. Rather, Vuković’s role in coordinating the process, his statements before the SDC, and his approval of extensive assistance to the VRS and SVK demonstrate that he was intent on assisting these armies. Vuković’s remarks before the VJ Collegium at the end of the war are equally instructive: “I could have retained the material reserves, all the material reserves to retain them here to the maximum, to give as little as possible material reserves away …. We gave all we had always and I am not sorry for that, as we defended the people as much as we could”. 
C.    Logistical and Technical Assistance to the VRS
1. Submissions of the Parties

1010.    The Prosecution submits that, as approved by Borislav Vuković pursuant to the authority granted by the SDC, the VJ provided considerable quantities of weaponry and military equipment, as well as training and technical assistance, to the VRS, which heavily depended on this aid because of its limited reserves and resources. It posits that the VRS did not have to pay for the material it received from the VJ. The Prosecution alleges that logistical assistance continued notwithstanding the FRY’s official imposition of sanctions on RS in August 1994. 

1011.    The Defence recognises that Vuković and the VJ gave assistance to the VRS pursuant to the SDC’s orders, although it submits that the VRS had substantial reserves of ammunition at its disposal, as well as other important sources of logistical assistance besides the VJ. The Defence argues that it is not possible to accurately estimate what supplies the VRS respectively obtained from the VJ and other sources, and that the Trial Chamber would engage in speculation by reaching a conclusion in this regard. In its eyes, “we don’t know” what supplies came from where. The Defence further “adopts” the “conclusions” made by Ivan Ðokić, who appeared as an expert witness on the VJ’s logistical assistance and generally posited that the latter was limited in scope. Ðokić’s testimony and report are discussed separately in a subsequent section. 
2. Delivery of Weaponry and Military Equipment to the VRS
(a) Analysis of Military Material Delivery Forms

1012.    The Trial Chamber was presented with numerous material delivery forms allegedly reflecting the VJ’s provision of weaponry to the VRS following Vuković’s orders.

1013.    The Defence raises multiple challenges to the material delivery forms, namely that various forms were not properly filled in, that they are unintelligible, that they do not adequately identify the sender and recipient, that they do not establish whether listed items were actually delivered, and that they do not reflect Vuković’s approval. 

1014.    Defence witness Jugoslav Kodžopeljić generally called in question the reliability of the material delivery forms, and the Defence relies to a significant extent on Kodžopeljić’s testimony in challenging this evidence. Kodžopeljić was the VJ General Staff’s Chief of Technical Administration from 1993 to 1999, and was responsible for matters of logistical support, as well as the oversight of the VJ General Staff’s Kragujevac and Čačak overhaul facilities. Kodžopeljić testified that the VJ had specific bookkeeping regulations governing all weapon deliveries to any military unit, and that no equipment could be delivered if not properly recorded in a material list, as doing so was important to the VJ’s budgetary and inventory planning. 

1015.    Conversely, Prosecution witness MP-14 analysed and authenticated various material delivery forms introduced into evidence by the Prosecution. MP-14 notably testified that the VRS regularly received military equipment from the VJ during the war, and that delivery forms were completed as part of standard procedure. The VJ and VRS used the same types of delivery forms, also described as “material lists”. MP-14 was familiar with the issue in light of his work at a VRS base, where he was subordinated to the Assistant Commander for Logistics of the VRS Main Staff. 

1016.    The Trial Chamber has closely analysed the material delivery forms, as well as Kodžopeljić and MP-14’s respective testimonies, and will now describe its findings.

1017.    At the outset, the Trial Chamber notes both the box for “unit of measure” and the box for “quantity” are filled in on certain forms. For instance, with regard to 155mm M-1 bullets under Ex. P568, the “unit of measure” reads “60” and the “amount” reads “100”. Witness MP-14 explained that the number “60” in the unit of measure form was a “code” number and not an actual quantity of items. That code is found in multiple other forms as well. As explained by MP-14, the relevant box is the one indicating the quantity of items, which was 100 M-1 bullets of 155mm calibre under Ex. P568. 

1018.    Kodžopeljić challenged the intelligibility of several material forms. The Trial Chamber does not find him credible in his claim that Ex. P574 is so unclear that “practically one cannot know in any way whatsoever what particular item has been delivered or issued”, notably because the nomenclature number on the form was incorrect. The form refers on its face to 5,400 rounds for 7.9mm M75 sniper-rifles and 60,016 universal 7.62mm rounds. That fact was confirmed by MP-14. Kodžopeljić’s position was that property was tracked in an automated database relying on 12-digit nomenclature numbers without which “nobody would know what we were talking about”. The Trial Chamber finds Kodžopeljić unpersuasive. Even though an improper nomenclature number might pose problems for tracking information in that database, it does not render a material list unintelligible if one can read on its face the names of the items provided. 

1019.    With regard to Ex. P572, Kodžopeljić recognised that the form indicates the sender as the VJ General Staff and the origin as Ladjeveci, Serbia, although he claimed that this information was “insufficient” for purposes of VJ administrative and financial planning, and posited that “the handwriting is the same as that of the person who has received the item”. The Trial Chamber considers that whether a form has sufficient information for purposes of VJ administrative and financial planning is irrelevant and does not render a delivery form incomprehensible on its face. Assuming Kodžopeljić was correct in stating that the person who filled out the form was the recipient, that fact alone would not render the form unreliable. MP-14’s testimony suggests that this fact would be unremarkable, as it was possible for the recipient to complete details in the paperwork omitted by the sender. 

1020.    Kodžopeljić also contended that Ex. P576 is unintelligible. The form reads that the sender was the VJ General Staff, that the material originated from Bogutovačka Banja, and that the recipient was the Drina Corps Command at Military Post 7111. It refers to 296 self-propelled gun rounds and 192 howitzer rounds, and bears a receipt stamp for the VRS’ base at Han Pijesak, RS. Upon examining the form, Kodžopeljić nevertheless opined that “ it’s impossible to know what this is about”. By contrast, MP-14 was able to easily understand the form. 

1021.    Kodžopeljić took a similar approach in examining Ex. P582. Because the box labelled “name and address of sender” was left blank on the form, Kodžopeljić claimed that “it is unknown who it was – or, rather, from which depot the material was sent”. In fact, that information is readily ascertainable by reading the box indicating the military post number of the sender and its location, namely 7518 and Paracin, Serbia, as well as the box indicating the bookkeeping sender in Niš, Serbia. Moreover, the form specifies that the delivery was conducted pursuant to an order by Vuković himself: “Decision NGŠ VJ / Yugoslav Army Chief of General Staff / Str. pov. br. / strictly confidential number / 6748-2, of 17.11.1993”. The mention of Vuković’s decision was inserted in the box labelled “name and address of the receiver” in Ex. P582, as well as Exs P579 and P581. 

1022.    With regard to Exs P579 and P581, the Trial Chamber notes that both forms bear the signature of an individual named Đorđe Cetković, whose ID was issued by the Zvornik Secretariat of Interior. Given that the same person signed for the receipt of a form that was explicitly addressed to the VRS, the Trial Chamber considers it established that the receiver was the VRS. Kodžopeljić’s assertion that “there is no indication of the recipient” is therefore misleading. The Trial Chamber further notes that Ex. P571, a delivery sheet where the VRS is explicitly labelled as the recipient, refers to a similar “confidential” order from Vuković, numbered “674-81” and dated “12.11.93”. 

1023.    Thus, the Trial Chamber considers that Kodžopeljić’s answers evince a lack of objectivity by depicting material delivery forms as far less intelligible than they actually are.

1024.    The Trial Chamber’s analysis of the material delivery forms indicates that multiple forms feature several boxes left unfilled. For instance, on certain forms, the box for “quantity requested- approved” is filled in but the box for “quantity issued-received” is left blank, or vice versa. In this regard, the Trial Chamber considers that the relevant box is the box that has been filled in. Similarly, the box for “category and year of production” has been left blank on numerous forms. The Trial Chamber does not find such omissions material so long as the form identifies the items supplied, their quantity, the sender, the recipient, and the date of conveyance or receipt.

1025.    The Trial Chamber notes that various forms are not stamped by both the sender and the recipient; and some also feature boxes that have not been filled in with information indicating the identity of the VJ member who approved the delivery, although a separate control signature may have been appended. Relying on Kodžopeljić, the Defence claims that it is consequently impossible to determine if these deliveries occurred and were legitimate. The Trial Chamber considers that a sending stamp or signature raises a presumption of delivery. The FRY-RS border was porous and the VJ could easily send large quantities of weaponry to the VRS with minimal risk that any weapons would be intercepted by international border monitors. The Trial Chamber considers as well that a receipt stamp or signature by VRS or RS authorities establishes that equipment was sent in the first place.

1026.    The Defence contends that the presence of blank boxes on the material forms otherwise renders the forms unreliable. The Trial Chamber finds that the mere fact that some boxes were left blank on a delivery form featuring multiple boxes does not raise a reasonable doubt as to the reliability of the forms. The Trial Chamber notes that MP-14 acknowledged that most material delivery forms were “incomplete”, but credibly explained that, in times of war, it was “practically impossible” to follow all rules and regulations regarding paperwork, partly because there was insufficient manpower to do so. MP-14 further explained that the presence of certain blank boxes on a form did not render transactions unfeasible or signify that they were unauthorised. 

1027.    Overall, the Defence endorses Kodžopeljić’s testimony. However, for all of the aforesaid reasons, the Trial Chamber finds Kod`opeljić to have minimal credibility. The Chamber additionally notes that Kodžopeljić was not credible in claiming that he essentially did not know the VJ’s 30th PC’s functions or why the 30th PC was listed as the recipient on certain material delivery lists, despite having been the Chief of Technical Administration for the VJ General Staff’s logistics sector from 1993 until 1999. It is well established that some weaponry was technically sent to the VRS and SVK via the Personnel Centres. Kodžopeljić also was not credible in his claim that all VJ supplies to the VRS were paid for. 

1028.    The Trial Chamber is mindful, however, that a number of supplies were delivered by VJ members to the VRS outside of the official procurement procedure devised by Vuković. As previously discussed, Vuković ordered in December 1993 that all requests for logistical assistance be processed through the VJ General Staff with his approval. Vuković decided to institute disciplinary proceedings against certain VJ commanders who gave military supplies directly to the VRS and SVK without authorisation. The Trial Chamber also recalls that Mladić ordered all VRS units to involve the VRS Main Staff in the official procurement of material from the VJ, pursuant to an agreement reached with Vuković. Mladić stressed that violators would face disciplinary action. 

1029.    In light of the occurrence of unauthorised logistical assistance, the Trial Chamber has decided to rely on material delivery forms and reports that either mention Vuković’s approval or indicate that supplies were sent by the VJ General Staff itself, as opposed to merely the VJ generally. The Trial Chamber has also decided to rely on documents indicating the involvement of the VRS Main Staff in transactions with the VJ.

1030.    For these reasons, the Trial Chamber has chosen not to rely on a material list simply stipulating that a VJ military facility in Paracin, Serbia, delivered to the Drina Corps Command a certain quantity of ammunition. The same problem applies to a form stating that the “VJ” delivered ammunition to the Drina Corps Command. Other documents also merely indicate that the Drina Corps Command received weaponry from “Batajnica”, as well as from “Kragujevac” without specifying that Vuković, the VJ General Staff or VRS Main Staff were involved. This information is also lacking in a report stating that, between 1 January and 31 December 1995, the VRS received various weapons from the VJ. 

1031.    Finally, the Defence notably argues that, aside from delivery forms, “ requests for assistance do not prove that assistance was given”. The Trial Chamber agrees with the Defence that mere requests cannot be assumed to have been fulfilled and cannot be counted as logistical assistance. That being noted, certain simple requests are otherwise instructive insofar as they contain statements from VRS personnel commenting on their low state of ammunition reserves or their dependence on VJ assistance. 

1032.    The Defence goes further in claiming that exhibits reflecting approved requests cannot be considered as proof of assistance unless separate evidence indicates that the assistance was later delivered. The Trial Chamber disagrees and finds that such exhibits indicating an agreement to deliver supplies or provide training cannot be treated as mere requests, but rather provide a reasonable basis to conclude that the delivery or training was later effectuated. These exhibits must be analysed in the context of the evidence adduced at trial. The Trial Chamber recalls that a comprehensive logistical assistance system was in place and that the FRY-RS border was porous, thereby enabling logistical assistance to be regularly delivered without difficulty. 

1033.    The Trial Chamber has considered the Defence’s remaining challenges on this issue and finds them unsubstantiated. In particular, the Defence contends that the Trial Chamber cannot consider Ex. P571 and P575 because they respectively concern mines and grenades sent to the VRS by the Mrsać-Kraljevo facility, which was “not under the authority of the VJ GŠ”, Vuković therefore having “no responsibility for this material”. Yet, both exhibits explicitly state that the transaction was conducted pursuant to an order by Vuković. 
(b) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1993 and August 1994

1034.    The Trial Chamber will now consider the material delivery forms and other evidence that it finds reliable and relevant to the allegations against Borislav Vuković based on the analytical method described above. The Trial Chamber will initially describe evidence of deliveries conducted between 26 August 1993, when Borislav Vuković became Chief of VJ General Staff, and August 1994, when the FRY officially imposed sanctions on RS.

1035.    On 12 November 1993, the VJ General Staff ordered that the VRS be supplied with over 800,000 bullets, 2,000 “rifle grenades” and 50 rocket launchers, all “free of charge”. The Drina Corps was the intended recipient of 800,000 bullets from this order. Evidence further indicates that, on 22 November 1993, the VJ General Staff delivered to the Drina Corps 30,000 rounds for browning machine guns and 50 anti-artillery rockets; as well as 5,400 rounds for 7.9mm M75 sniper-rifles and 60,016 universal 7.62mm rounds. 

1036.    Numerous deliveries were effectuated on 22 and 23 November 1993. Three were conducted pursuant to “strictly confidential” orders from Vuković. One order concerned 30,000 rounds for browning firearms and 50 rockets, while the others concerned 60 mines and 2,000 grenades. In addition, three separate delivery sheets indicate that the VJ General Staff sent the Drina Corps 300 mortar shells, 800,100 rounds, 296 self-propelled gun rounds and 192 howitzer rounds. 

1037.    On 24 November 1993, another “strictly confidential” order from Vuković led the Drina Corps to obtain 150,000 machine gun heavy rounds, 500 rockets, 960 hand grenades and 30 “modified” hand grenades. On 25 November 1993, the VJ General Staff delivered to the Drina Corps over two million bullets and 1,727 mortar shells, a large delivery requiring multiple truckloads; as well as a separate delivery of 3,269 mortar rounds and 148 shells. 



1038.    Multiple deliveries were likewise conducted in December 1993. Perišic personally issued a “strictly confidential” order stating: “For the needs of re-supply, the following weapons and military equipment shall be ceded to VRS”. The order went on to list: 721,250 rounds, 2,000 76mm cases, 27,130 grenades, 900 shells, 50 mines, 100 rockets, 85 Osa rocket launchers, 300 charges for rocket launchers, 3,000 basic charges and 350 fuses. Vuković also coordinated the VRS’s procurement of 1,525,600 rounds and 20,192 rockets, as well as other orders of 12,000 bullets, 70,200 rounds and 600kg of hydraulic oil. Pursuant to an order from the VJ General Staff, the VRS received another 61,460 bullets. The VRS additionally received at least 170 artillery rounds for D20 Howitzers and 130mm guns from the Kragujevac Technical Overhaul Company (TRZ), whose function was to repair and refill ammunition. The Defence claims that the Kragujevac TRZ was not under VJ General Staff oversight, an incorrect assertion contradicted by two of its own witnesses. An order from Vuković ceding military supplies to the VRS confirms that Vuković evidently had the authority to issue orders to the Kragujevac TRZ: “The responsibility for transfers of supplies is assigned to Technical Repair Facility Kragujevac”. 

1039.    Mladić and Vuković discussed logistical assistance matters on 27 December 1993 in Belgrade. Mladić wrote in his diary that a request for supplies of steel, fuses and TNT had been “resolved”. 

1040.    On 13 January 1994, the Krajina Corps officially notified the VRS Main Staff that the VJ had supplied it with 428 semi-automatic rifles, 286 automatic rifles, 101 rifles, 33 sub-machine guns, 6 sniper rifles, 10 semi-automatic pistols, 4 pistols, 18 rocket launchers, 1 howitzer, 15 telephones and 2 radio sets. Given that Mladić ordered that VRS units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures, in accordance with Vuković’s directives; the only reasonable inference is that the Krajina Corps was referring to officially- approved assistance when it informed the VRS Main Staff that it had obtained these supplies from the VJ.

1041.    On 15 January 1994, Mladić wrote to Vuković, asking the VJ General Staff to dispatch to the VRS a team of experts, which had previously been used to develop 262 mm “Orkan” rockets, so that it could dismantle components from Orkan rockets located in Knin and subsequently re-mount them on missiles at the Military Technical Institute, even though it was subordinated to the FRY MOD. Four days later, Vuković wrote a letter, coded “very urgent” and “highly confidential”, to the SVK Main Staff, stating: “A work team is dispatched, led by Col Radomir EĆIMOVIĆ, in order to implement the agreement you made with Lt Col Gen MLADIĆ, which relates to dismantling 4 barrels of the 262mm ‘Orkan’ SVLR/self-propelled multiple rocket launcher/. Please enable the work group to carry out the task”. 

1042.    On 17 February 1994, the VJ made an arrangement to “loan” 42.72 tonnes of TNT to the VRS pursuant to an official transaction with the RS MOD. 

1043.    On 31 March 1994, the VJ General Staff supplied the VRS with 1,181,491 rounds of different types, followed by 5,000 rounds for anti-aircraft guns pursuant to Vuković’s decision. 

1044.    On 18 April 1994, Vuković called supplies to a halt: “I hereby forbid (until further notice) the issuance of the NVO / weapons and military equipment / to the armies of the RS and RSK (30th and 40th KC / Personnel Centre/)”. Nevertheless, deliveries of weaponry to the VRS resumed shortly thereafter, as indicated by multiple subsequent SDC meetings where logistical assistance continued to be agreed upon with Vuković’s encouragement, as well as by the continuing flow of logistical assistance.

1045.    On 22 May 1994, the VJ General Staff provided 3,353,000 bullets and 1,400 shells to the VRS. Following Vuković’s orders, subsequent deliveries included 200,000 bullets, 21,850 bullets and 64 rockets, and another 2,900 bullets. 

1046.    On 11 July 1994, the VRS Krajina Corps officially informed the VRS Main Staff that it had received from the VJ a total of 2,598,100 bullets for 7.62mm automatic rifles, 6,300 bullets for 7.62mm pistols, and 966 mines. Again, because Mladić ordered that VRS units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures, in accordance with Vuković’s directives; the only reasonable inference is that the Krajina Corps was referring to officially-approved assistance when it informed the VRS Main Staff that it had obtained these supplies from the VJ.

1047.    In 1994 as a whole, the VRS Main Staff estimated that it had obtained from the VJ approximately 25,878,862 infantry bullets and 7,569 shells, among other ammunition. 
(c) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1994 and December 1995 during the Period of Sanctions Imposed by the FRY on Republika Srpska

1048.    The flow of military supplies from the VJ General Staff to the VRS continued after August 1994, notwithstanding the FRY’s decision to officially seal its border with RS except for medical equipment and other humanitarian supplies, as part of its sanctions on RS for having refused to accept a proposed peace plan. The FRY’s nominal prohibition on the delivery of military materiel to the VRS essentially lasted until the end of the war in BiH. 

1049.    On 25 August 1995, approximately a year after the imposition of the sanctions, a meeting of the FRY and RS leadership was convened, bringing together, among others, Borislav Vuković, Slobodan Milošević, Zoran Lilić, Ratko ladić, Radovan Karadžić and the Serbian Orthodox Church’s top representatives. The transcript of the meeting reads: “Bishop Irinej advocated the tacit lifting of the Drina River blockade. President Milošević responded that the blockade was merely a formality and that aid flows daily”. 

1050.    Milošević admitted in 2001 that the FRY had secretly provided significant military assistance to the VRS during the war. Milošević denied having used any state funds for his personal gain or that of others, instead insisting that the state funds were used “for the survival of the country during a total embargo and war across the Drina river, in which we helped our people with all the resources we had at our disposal”. Milošević specifically mentioned the FRY’s logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK:



these expenditures constituted a state secret and because of state interests could not be indicated in the Law on the Budget, which is a public document. The same applies to the expenditures incurred by providing equipment, from a needle to an anchor, for the security forces and special anti-terrorist forces in particular, from light weapons and equipment to helicopters and other weapons which still remain where they are today, and this was not made public because it was a state secret, as was everything else that was provided for the Army of Republika Srpska. 



1051.    Milošević emphasised:



As to the exceptional amount of material gain quoted as a reason for custody, the question arises: for whom? For the Army of Republika Srpska, the security organs, the Army of the Republic of Serbian Krajina, to help the people across the Drina river, the textile and metal workers and others financed through Beogradska Banka in the most difficult social situation and during a total external blockade. 



1052.    According to Michael Williams, who served as Director of Information for UNPROFOR from February 1994 until April 1995 and saw all classified reports in the UN’s possession, the RS-FRY border was difficult to monitor, partly due to the nature of the terrain and the length of the border. While Milošević was reluctant to have monitors at the border, he eventually agreed to do so in mid-September 1994 at the request of UN officials. However, “the international community was given grossly inadequate resources ” to monitor the 300-mile border. The monitoring body consisted of a small force lacking access to the information and intelligence in NATO’s possession. The UN military command deemed that closely monitoring the border was impossible. Milošević nonetheless gave repeated assurances that the border was completely sealed, and that only food, clothes and medicine would be permitted passage. 

1053.    A report from the Co-Chairmen of the Steering Committee of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, dated 18 May 1995, concluded that the FRY government was meeting its commitment to close the border. FRY Customs had reported confiscating various goods at the RS border, such as petrol, diesel, cigarettes and food, although no ammunition or weapons were reportedly confiscated. These goods were contraband transported by smugglers, not VRS or VJ personnel. Smugglers regularly managed to cross the border in certain areas that were negligently monitored by FRY Customs in spite of repeated complaints by UN officials. Unarmed uniformed personnel were improperly allowed to cross the border on at least 688 occasions, while uniformed policemen were allowed to cross carrying a sidearm on at least seven occasions, and several uniformed personnel and military vehicles were barred from crossing the border on at least one occasion. 

1054.    Despite that report, Williams observed that the overall military capabilities of the VRS increased in 1994 and 1995 due to FRY assistance. He opined that, while there had been a “political break” between the FRY and RS, the sanctions had not fundamentally altered the “close ties” between the VJ and VRS – both stemmed from the JNA and officers shared a sense of “intimacy” from having taken the same courses and worked at the same bases. 

1055.    Charles Kirudja, the Chief of Civil Affairs for the UN Mission in Belgrade, likewise concluded that “most core officers of the VJ had never really fallen in line with Milošević about the closing of the border and the isolation of their ‘brothers on the Drina’”. A report by Colonel Bogojević of the VRS’s 1st Krajina Corps corroborated this conclusion:



After the unilateral suspension of the political and economic relations of the FRY with the RS, we have registered frequent rumours and misinformation on an alleged suspension of relations of the VJ with the VRS ... On the contrary, the relations between the VRS and VJ are still correct and have not been upset by the suspension of political and economic relations of the SRJ with the RS. There has not been a single case of calling of professional soldiers or NCOs in the VRS back to the VJ. Also, the intensified measures of control of the interstate border (on border crossings)
were taken by organs of the MUP and Customs Service of the RS, but not of the VJ. 



Bogojević went on to note that the VRS’s cooperation with the VJ had actually “improved” since the sanctions. Similarly, UN military intelligence indicated that helicopter flights from the FRY to RS increased following the sanctions. 

1056.    In his report to the RS National Assembly, Mladić stated that supplies of weaponry almost ended after the sanctions were imposed: “ Ever since August 1994 it has been very difficult, supplies have almost dried up”. Yet, the trial record demonstrates that the VJ General Staff continued to surreptitiously deliver significant quantities of weaponry to the VRS throughout the sanctions period, although this assistance was a FRY “state secret”. 

1057.    MP-14 testified that he witnessed that the VRS continued to receive significant logistical assistance from the VJ during the sanctions period, albeit in far lower volumes, as ammunition and weapons were transported without documentation and “in secret” through a forest road without a border checkpoint. As stated above, Milomir Kovačević, who worked as a truck driver for the Serbian MUP during the sanctions period, likewise testified that the VJ continued to deliver military supplies to the VRS by surreptitiously transporting cargo across the FRY-RS border in order to avoid monitors. 

1058.    Additionally, Milan Babić testified that the VRS was obtaining clandestine assistance from the VJ. He explained that the sanctions could be circumvented and that they were only a pretence. 

1059.    Even though the VRS’s situation was partly worsened by the FRY’s “economic blockade” on RS, the VJ largely maintained its regular delivery of military supplies to the VRS, as further indicated by the following evidence.

1060.    In January 1995, the VRS Main Staff reported that “a great number of commands, units and certain members of the VJ have selflessly been offering us humanitarian aid and services which are extremely important for Republika Srpska Defence”. On 27 February 1995, the VJ General Staff issued to the VRS, via the 30th Personnel Centre, 100 contact fuses for howitzer cannons following a ruling by Vuković. 

1061.    In May 1995, General Mladen Mihajlović of the VJ General Staff, reported that Vuković had granted a request by the VRS Main Staff and “approved the handover of the following engineers’ NVO without allowance”, namely 10,000 mines and five tonnes of explosives. In a separate memorandum, Mihajlović stated that the VJ General Staff “approves the transfer of engineering military equipment and arms, without remuneration”, namely three additional rocket devices to open passages through mine fields. 

1062.    On 26 May 1995, General Mladić asked the VJ General Staff for over 17,000 mines and various engineering supplies, a request granted approximately in half. On 19 June 1995, Mladić forwarded a “ very urgent” request to Vuković for 1,835,850 rounds of various calibres and 2,000 shells required for heavy combat operations in the Trnovo area, near Sarajevo. On the very next day, the VJ General Staff responded by telegram: “We hereby ... inform you that the Chief of General Staff of the Army of Yugoslavia ordered the following: ‘Give /it/ to Ratko /so as to/ have this resolved’”. Mihajlović recognised Vuković’s initials at the top of the document and Mihajlović stated that the “Ratko” in question was Lieutenant-General Ratko Milovanović, a VJ administrator. The Trial Chamber finds that the fact that this request would be “resolved” shows that the sanctions were not enforced.

1063.    On 8 June 1995, the Zvornik Infantry Brigade reported the receipt of weaponry from the VJ General Staff’s Kragujevac TRZ, including 254,520 bullets. On 16 June 1995, the VRS Main Staff gave its official authorisation for a unit to take over 22 motor vehicles and 5 trailers from the VJ, and a VRS officer involved in the process noted that “it seems likely that the VJ will hand over some 50-100 more motor vehicles and other material supplies in the future”. 

1064.    On 17 June 1995, the SRK Command addressed a “very urgent” letter to the VRS Main Staff asking for the immediate preparation of documentation necessary for representatives of the Corps to retrieve weaponry in the FRY, namely 273,000 bullets and 11,000 shells, as “it has been agreed with the responsible people in the VJ that the requested materiel should be obtained and immediately delivered to the unit”. The SRK followed with a separate yet similar request to the VRS Main Staff concerning 120,000 bullets and 1,850 shells, as agreed upon with VJ representatives. In addition, Dragomir Milošević later notified the VRS Main Staff that the VJ had made two mortars available to the SRK. The VRS Main Staff’s involvement in these transactions with the VJ again reasonably establishes that they were part of the official logistical assistance process. 

1065.    The Kragujevac TRZ equally supplied 350,280 rounds to the VRS via the VJ’s 30th Personnel Centre on 17 June 1995, soon followed by 567,000 bullets and 46 rockets. Later that month, Vuković agreed with the proposal of the Ground Troops Sector of the VJ General staff that a 152mm M37 howitzer should be “ceded permanently [...] for the needs of the VRS”. 

1066.    On 5 July 1995, the VJ General Staff provided 38 radio devices, 146 telephones and other communications equipment to the VRS. On 1 August 1995, the Kragujevac TRZ provided 6,599 bullets of various calibres and 60 mines to the VRS. A letter from General Novica Simić of the Eastern Bosnia Corps Command, dated 2 August 1995, indicates that the Posavina Light Infantry Brigade had obtained from the VJ, with the permission of the VRS Main Staff, 1,680 shells, 1,200 rockets, 180 bullet rounds and 33 pieces for machine-gun barrels. 

1067.    Between 16 and 23 September 1995, the Eastern Bosnia Corps received from the FRY a total of 1,046,035 bullets of various calibres, 934 mortar shells, 150 rockets, 72 rounds for RRB 64mm, 1,999 semi-automatic rifles, 50 machine guns, 18 cannons and 15 pieces of “LRL 128mm M-71”. Whereas the Eastern Bosnia Corps’s report to the VRS Main Staff simply states that this weaponry originated from the “FRY”, the only reasonable inference is that it was provided by the VJ General Staff or the FRY special purpose industries. For the reasons stated above, the only reasonable inference is that the Eastern Bosnia Corps was referring to officially-approved assistance when it informed the VRS Main Staff that it had procured these supplies from the FRY, as Mladić ordered that VRS units who engaged in unauthorised procurement would face disciplinary measures. The Trial Chamber concludes that the Eastern Bosnia Corps’s report equally shows that the sanctions were not enforced.

1068.    The RS MOD determined that the VRS obtained immense quantities of weaponry between August 1994 and November 1995, precisely the period of sanctions by the FRY on RS; to wit 61,590,737 rounds of rifle ammunition, 92,125 rounds of “ other infantry ammunition”, 73,184 rounds of mortar ammunition, 14,615 rounds of artillery ammunition, 5,915 rounds of tank ammunition, 1,708 missiles, 298,593 items of “ anti-aircraft ammunition and missiles”, 60 aerial bombs, as well as 108,995 items of “ l aunch equipment and other NVO /weapons and military equipment/”. The RS MOD’s report merely identifies this weaponry as “ p urchases and donations” without specifying its source. Nevertheless, the trial record solely establishes that the VRS received ammunition from the VJ and the FRY special purpose industries. No evidence establishes that the VRS received ammunition from any country other than the FRY. 

1069.    Overall, the FRY Supreme Defence Council continued to agree on logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK during the sanctions period, and Vuković himself urged the SDC to keep on authorising this assistance. Yet, Defence witness Siniša Borović, who was Vuković’s Chef de Cabinet between November 1994 and December 1996, advanced that he was “not familiar with any decisions made by General Vuković which would violate the embargo”. Borović went as far as claiming that no documents establish that the VJ assisted the VRS in violation of the military sanctions. In his view, the VJ granted “very few” of the VRS’s requests even before the sanctions. The Trial Chamber does not find Borović’s testimony credible in light of the overwhelming evidence to the contrary.
3. The Koran Depot in Republika Srpska

1070.    The VJ supplied the VRS’s military depot in Koran, RS, which was affiliated with the VRS’s 27th Rear Base in Sokolac. The base formerly belonged to the JNA but was taken over by the VRS after the war began. The Koran Depot’s purpose was to supply the VRS with weapons, ammunition, artillery, equipment, mines and, in part, fuel. Within the VRS, it mainly supplied the SRK but also the Drina Corps, 2nd Krajina Corps and other units. 

1071.    A large quantity of ammunition was stored at the Koran Depot before the conflict in BiH started, which the VRS obtained when it took over the base from the VJ by September 1992. That ammunition was exhausted by the end of 1992. Because there was no capacity to manufacture infantry ammunition in RS, the Koran Depot subsequently received approximately 70% of its ammunition from the VJ and approximately 30% from manufacturers in Serbia, mainly from Užice. The supplies provided by these manufacturers included infantry ammunition from the Prvi Partizan depot in U`ice, mortar rounds from Krušik, Valjevo and 120mm ammunition from Čačak. 

1072.    Supplies from the VJ arrived constantly at the Koran Depot, and even more frequently when the VRS was conducting an offensive. According to MP-14, “far fewer” deliveries occurred after the FRY imposed sanctions on the VRS, although “the supply did continue”. 

1073.    The standard procurement procedure was for the VRS to send the Koran Depot a notice concerning an incoming order of ammunition from the VJ, and for the Koran Depot to send trucks to Serbia to retrieve the ammunition from VJ military depots or for the VJ to send its own delivery trucks directly. On certain instances, long convoys of twenty trucks would effectuate deliveries. The biggest convoy consisted of over twenty trucks containing upwards of 500 tonnes of artillery and infantry ammunition. MP-14 was unsure, however, of the precise date of this delivery, recollecting that it occurred in either the “late summer for [sic] early autumn in 1993”. Because there is doubt that this particular convoy delivery occurred after Vuković was appointed Chief of VJ General Staff on 26 August 1993, the Trial Chamber will not rely on the evidence of this delivery.
4. The Pretis Military Factory in Republika Srpska

1074.    Pretis was an industrial company and factory that produced weaponry for the VRS in Vogošća, a suburb of Sarajevo. The military conflict in the vicinity of the Pretis factory “did not greatly affect security” so that all of its manufacturing and technological facilities remained “intact” and “in working order” until NATO bombed the factory in September 1995. Pretis produced artillery ammunition ranging from 57 to 220 calibres, “the latest new caliber”; as well as shells, mines and modified air bombs. Pretis did not produce small arms ammunition, as the technology for such production was different and was carried out in other factories in Valjevo, Serbia, for the Krušik company, as well as Bugojno and other locations. Pretis also purchased mines, flash bombs, rifle clips, cartridges and bullets from the Kragujevac TRZ in Serbia. 
(a) Status of Pretis as a Company

1075.    Nikola Tošović, who spent his entire career working as a technician for Pretis and ultimately became chief of technical services for the Vogošća brigade of the SRK, could not give an exact answer when asked under whose umbrella Pretis fell, as there were “all sorts of connections: Belgrade, government of Republika Srpska”. The company had a “representative office” in Belgrade that sold Pretis’ products for a service commission, although it “could only clinch minor deals”. According to Tošović, Pretis operated as a commercial company, buying raw materials to manufacture its products, which it sold on the open market. 

1076.    Tošović was also unsure about which organ regulated Pretis from 1994 until the end of the war. Tošović was not explicitly asked who regulated Pretis before 1994. He believed that Pretis was part of the Unis corporation, which operated in the metal processing industry. General Abaz Deronja was in charge of all of Unis, including Pretis. Tošović did not specify for which army General Abaz Deronja worked. Unis’ budget “came from the orders it received because it produced also for export, and ... nobody gave it money”. 

1077.    Witness MP-14 described Pretis as a “half civilian, half military” facility under the RS government. He was not absolutely sure if it was overseen by the RS MOD or VRS Main Staff during the war, although he indicated that Pretis “could decide on its own which ammunition and what quantities of ammunition to deliver to whom” until 1994, when the VRS Main Staff ordered Pretis to send precise quantities of ammunition to designated units. On the other hand, a document indicates that the RS MOD sought to exercise authority over Pretis. 

1078.    The evidence described below shows that the RS MOD and VRS Main Staff had competing claims of authority over Pretis, which was a point of contention between them. 
(b) Relationship between the VJ and Pretis
(i) Presence of the Accused at Pretis in January 1994

1079.    On 8 January 1994, a meeting was held between several politicians and military commanders, including Borislav Vuković and Ratko Mladić, at the Park Hotel in Vogošća. Mladić invited Tošović, his cousin, to a festive lunch with Vuković and other persons following the meeting. After Mladić introduced Tošović to Vuković as a “captain first class in charge of logistics in the army”, Vuković briefly addressed Tošović and the rest of the logistics personnel “in passing”: “he told us that they were short of ammunition, that we were short of ammunition, that we should save every bullet, and that we should try and use the resources that existed in companies. For instance, Pretis had quite a substantial supply of shells, bullets, lying around in warehouses”. 

1080.    When asked whether Vuković seemed to be aware of the situation at Pretis, Tošović responded:



Vuković knew very well what Pretis was and what it meant for the entire state of Yugoslavia. It was an excellent artillery ammunition factory with a large capacity, very substantial capacity; and he knew very well what could be found lying around in every corner of the factory, and he knew that with what was lying around, something could be made. And that’s why he suggested that to us, and who better suited for such suggestion than us logistics men. 
(ii)    Involvement of the VJ in Pretis’ Production

1081.    The VJ General Staff paid the salaries of monitors placed inside Pretis to inform the VJ base command about the quantity and type of ammunition that Pretis produced in RS. Notably, Colonel Radomir Ećimović, a VRS engineer on the VJ payroll, was in charge of military inspections at Pretis. Further, Major Marković, a Pretis engineer paid by the VJ, was responsible for modifying air-bombs, as well as appending the appropriate fuses to shells and mines. 

1082.    Before Pretis could begin manufacturing weaponry, the Military Technical Institute in Belgrade, itself subordinated to the FRY MOD, examined documents containing the proposed design for particular weapons. The Military Technical Institute would coordinate with Pretis to see if the weapons were properly designed, such as whether a shell would function. 

1083.    The VJ subsequently assisted Pretis in testing weapons once they had been produced. Rockets produced by Pretis were tested on the firing range of the VJ’s Technical Testing Centre at Nikinci in May 1994, as were bullets and artillery ammunition in May 1995. According to a report by Dušan Kovačević, then RS Minister of Defence, FRY assistance in testing VRS weaponry was needed:



From the very outset of combat activities in the territory of Republika Srpska a need has appeared for the examining of the quality of ammunition, the continuity of the production of which has been kept up at the PRETIS – HOLDING Enterprise in Vogošća. ... Republika Srpska is not and has not been in a position to furnish and put into operation a training ground for testing the quality of weapons and military equipment, nor would that prove rentable for the time being. For this reason, existing training grounds in the territory of the FR Yugoslavia were used, in particular so the one in Nikinci. 



1084.    Pretis also depended on the assistance of the Kragujevac TRZ, one of its main trading partners. Pretis sent the Kragujevac TRZ artillery casings, which the Kragujevac TRZ cleaned and sent back to Pretis, where they were re-filled with new gunpowder and reusable up to five times. Pretis would not have been able to produce ammunition without overhauling by the Kragujevac TRZ, a facility under the VJ General Staff’s control. 

1085.    The Defence submits that the Prosecution has failed to establish a “nexus” between Vuković and Pretis’ supply of material to the VRS. To the contrary, the Trial Chamber finds that Vuković and the VJ General Staff provided an important measure of operational support to Pretis.
(iii) Importation of Raw Materials and Components from the FRY

1086.    Pretis lacked the raw materials and components necessary to manufacture ammunition from late 1992 or early 1993 onwards. The Trial Chamber was presented with differing estimates of the overall extent to which Pretis’ military production depended on materials imported from the FRY. A 20 September 1994 document from Pretis’ director states: “The sanctions imposed by Serbia on RS have had disastrous consequences on supplies of raw materials, because the factory relies almost 100% on supplies from SR Yugoslavia”. Tošović was shown the document and agreed with Motika’s assessment that military production was disastrous and that Pretis relied on Serbian assistance, although he disagreed that Pretis exclusively depended on Serbia for 100% of its materials, as it received steel from Russia, for instance. Moreover, MP-14 opined that Pretis could not have manufactured artillery without receiving key components from the FRY. 

1087.    Gunpowder was procured from Lučani, explosive charges from Barič and tin from Sevojno. Pretis relied on “powder charge” from the Krušik military factory in Valjevo in order to produce mines. Fuses were also obtained from Serbia and shell components (iron blocks) from Nikšić, Montenegro, in the FRY. Components for pyrotechnic materials used in casings and canons were obtained from Lučani, Barič, and Valjevo. Pretis’ director expected an imminent truck delivery of 12,000 kg of TNT and 8,000 kg of copper tubing from the FRY in August 1995. 

1088.    Pretis dispatched Ećimović to the FRY in November 1992 “to obtain raw materials for continuing the production of weapons and military equipment”. While that event preceded Vuković’s appointment as Chief of VJ GŠ, it shows Pretis’ reliance on raw materials from the FRY.

1089.    The Prosecution contends that Vuković was involved in the FRY’s provision of raw materials to Pretis. The Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the evidence establishes this fact. Overall, the evidentiary record does not prove that Vuković or the VJ General Staff were involved in deliveries of raw materials and components from the FRY to Pretis.
(c) Supply of Weapons Produced by Pretis to the VRS

1090.    A letter from Pretis’ director reads that, “ s ince the war broke out ... Pretis factory’s special-purposes production has been to manufacture artillery ammunition for the VRS and VJ”. The bulk of the ammunition produced by Pretis during the war was sent to the VRS’s military fronts, while a smaller proportion was supplied to the VJ. Tošović was unable to say, however, whether Pretis supplied a particular corps within the VRS. However, MP-14 stated that Pretis mostly supplied the 3rd Sarajevo Brigade, while a large number of ammunition would also go to the VRS’s 27th Logistics Base in Renovića and the VRS’s Koran Depot. 

1091.    The Koran Depot cooperated with Pretis during the war by delivering empty shells that Pretis would refill with gunpowder, before returning them to the Koran depot. The Koran Depot received ammunition from Pretis twice or thrice per week on average, although there were delivery convoys everyday during certain weeks. The SRK, Drina Corps and other VRS units also brought their used shells to Pretis to be refilled with gunpowder. Additionally, the VRS Krajina Corps reportedly obtained from Pretis 800 bullets of various calibres, 800 bullets for D-30 howitzers and 700 mortar mines. 

1092.    Dušan Kovačević, the former RS Minister of Defence, claimed that the SRK could get their ammunition directly from Pretis without prior authorisation from the RS MOD, as General Mladić would go to Pretis and simply “order” the factory manager to cease supplying anyone except for the unit(s) designated by Mladić himself:



[Mladić] would bring his security there and would often threaten the manager that he would either be removed, replaced, or liquidated. He forced Pretis to produce ammunition for a particular unit. This practice was also employed by some local commanders of the Sarajevo-Romanija Corps. They knew that if a platoon went there or a considerable number of armed soldiers led by a commander, they would simply lay siege to the production line, wait for the eventual product, they would simply take it, load it onto their vehicles, and be off. 



1093.    Kovačević regarded these as unauthorised “wanton and arbitrary action[s] being taken by individuals, even if they were members of the army” that “actually happened quite often, despite which it was impossible to prevent it. All those who made incursions of this kind would normally hold people at gun point while making their threats. … [The RS MOD] had no power to issue any orders to the Main Staff of the VRS” or “to stop occurrences such as these”. 

1094.    The Trial Chamber notes that, based on the foregoing evidence, it cannot reasonably exclude the possibility that Mladić and his subordinates procured weaponry from Pretis without permission from the RS MOD or by force. But this fact would be irrelevant in the context of a procurement procedure organised by Vuković in conjunction with Mladić and the VRS Main Staff, not the RS MOD. Besides, the RS MOD’s alleged lack of control over Mladić and the VRS Main Staff with regard to Pretis does not raise doubts regarding other evidence demonstrating the VJ General Staff’s assistance to Pretis’ production process.

1095.    The Trial Chamber further notes that, while Kovačević claimed that Mladić and VRS members unlawfully seised weaponry from Pretis, Ðorñe Ðukić conversely claimed that Borislav Krajišnik, the former President of the RS Assembly, cooperated with the RS MOD to distribute Pretis’ weaponry without the approval of the VRS Main Staff. In addition, Mladić mentioned that a number of VRS commanders improperly took certain weaponry from RS-based military factories without permission from the VRS Main Staff and RS MOD, although Mladić stated that these commanders had obtained the “help and tacit agreement” of the factory managers, contrary to Kovačević who mentioned forceful takeovers by Mladić and his subordinates against the Pretis manager’s wishes. 

1096.    This particular evidence is inconclusive but suggests, at most, that the relationship between the VRS Main Staff and RS MOD was dysfunctional and discordant. In this regard, it is noteworthy that Kovačević himself commented on the existence of “open clashes” between the RS MOD and VRS Main Staff, “personified by General Ratko Mladić”; as well as clashes and “personal resentment” between Mladić and Karadžić. 
5. Provision of Modified Air-Bombs

1097.    “Modified air-bombs” were bombs originally built to be launched from the air but that were modified to be launched from the ground by installing rocket motors that would be triggered electronically. 

1098.    Modified air bombs were in part the result of the imposition of a no-fly zone over BiH in October 1992, which precluded the VRS from using their aircraft bombs normally, and led the VRS to devise means of propelling them by rockets from the ground. According to Ðorđe Ðukić, the idea to use these weapons originated with the Eastern Bosnia Corps of the VRS, commanded by Novica Simić. “As far as I can remember”, Ðukić said, “on one occasion the late General Rajko Balać spoke to General Mladić about this method of using aerial bombs”. Mladić eventually ordered that possibilities be explored for producing modified air-bomb launchers at the level of the Corps. “ The initial launches of this modified rocket system failed”. Ðukić added: “I know that the first systems used a single rocket engine for propulsion and that this is what probably caused the launches to fail. After the rocket battery was built with two or three engines, the launches probably became more successful … After Mladić probably satisfied himself that the system was efficient, he issued an order to all the corps to proceed with building launchers”. The launchers were built in the Herzegovina, Drina, Eastern Bosnia, Sarajevo-Romanija and 1st Krajina Corps. 

1099.    Ðorđe Ðukić did not explain who managed to develop a successful technical model for modifying air-bombs. He stated, however, “I am certain that, apart from Mladić and Balać, no one from the Main Staff of the Army of Republika Srpska worked on this program”. 

1100.    The evidence shows that the VJ General Staff played a key role in devising the successful technical model by which aerial bombs were modified. Ivan Ðokić, a technical engineer who served as chief of the VJ General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration between 1994 and 2000, denied being the “architect” of the modified air-bombs but admitted being a member of a VJ General Staff team that developed the modified air-bomb model. Ðokić acknowledged that he “headed” the sector that designed the electronic part of the ignition system for modified air- bombs. Vuković himself described Ðokić as “a very intuitive man who successfully designed and modified an aircraft bomb to fit the launcher”. Asked if Vuković’s statement accurately reflects what he did, Ðokić agreed: “It does, and it’s consistent with my previous answer that we modified the electric – the electronic system for the ignition of the engine in my sector”. 

1101.    Ðokić denied that the air-bombs modified by his team were sent to the VRS. He claimed that these weapons were only given to the VJ General Staff’s Artillery Administration and were never sent anywhere, remaining in the possession of the Serbian military to this day. The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence does not conclusively establish that the VJ supplied completed modified air-bombs to the VRS. On the other hand, the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the VJ General Staff shared with the VRS the technical model by which air-bombs were successfully modified. The evidence indeed shows that the VRS’s initial technical model was unsuccessful and that the successful model was developed by Ivan Ðokić’s team in the VJ General Staff. It is clear from Ðokić’s testimony that the VRS did not independently develop a successful technical model.

1102.    Ðokić was adamant that he did not oversee the actual launching of modified air-bombs, although he admitted travelling to Bosnia in late 1994 to help resolve operational problems with the modified air-bombs in the VRS’s possession. On 31 May 1995, Mladić wrote a letter to Vuković stipulating that the Eastern Bosnia Corps had been “using a modified apu-13mt rocket launcher ... constructed with a Yugoslav Army team’s expert assistance”. Mladić asked Vuković for six nitrogen-filled tanks for the launcher. The request bears a handwritten note from Vuković stating “Check also with Ðokić”, thereby indicating that Vuković gave his agreement in principle. That same date, Mladić asked Vuković to dispatch an expert team led by Ðokić to assist the VRS in resolving problems with its rockets and “modified anti-aircraft defence equipment”. Mladić stated that Ðokić was “familiar with the essence of the problem and is willing to help”. Vuković handwrote the following note on Mladić’s request: “Give it to Ðokić / Let him arrange it if he can / And report back to me today”. Ðokić admitted that he participated in this mission. 

1103.    Modified air-bombs lacked guiding systems and it was consequently impossible to adequately predict their trajectory and target. Their usage on civilian areas of Sarajevo was not legitimate, particularly since they served to terrify and kill civilians. Ðokić stated that he did not become aware until after the war that modified air-bombs were fired on Sarajevo civilians, and that these weapons were “not at all planned nor designed to be used in urban communities”, a practice that he described as “totally inappropriate and wrong”. 

1104.    The Pretis military factory in Bosnia produced modified air-bombs for the VRS. As previously noted, Major Marković, a Pretis engineer on the VJ payroll, was responsible for modifying air-bombs. The Trial Chamber recalls that the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the modification of air-bombs at Pretis was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić and the VJ General Staff.

1105.    Only 100kg and 250kg air-bombs were modified at Pretis, as plans to manufacture 500kg and 1,000kg modified air-bombs were thwarted by the NATO bombing of the factory in September 1995. During the war, Pretis neither manufactured the air-bombs themselves nor the rocket motor engines installed on the air-bombs, and Pretis had to procure these items in order to modify the air-bombs. 

1106.    Pretis obtained certain air-bombs from the reserves left behind by the VJ in Bosnia, a period preceding Vuković’s appointment as Chief of General Staff. The modified air-bombs assembled by Pretis were sent to the Koran Depot. Starting in 1995, part of them were also directly delivered to the 3rd Sarajevo Brigade for usage in Sarajevo, while the rest of the air-bombs were sent to other units, including the Drina Corps, as well as the Bijeljina Base in the area of the East Bosnia Corps. 

1107.    Several order sheets indicate that the SRK and other VRS units received modified air-bombs from Pretis. On 19 April 1995, the VRS Main Staff directed Pretis to produce at least ten modified air-bombs. On 16 May 1995, it organised Pretis’ production of four modified air-bombs for the SRK’s needs. It subsequently made arrangements for Pretis to prepare eleven modified air-bombs for the needs of the 1st Trebava Infantry Brigade. On 20 June 1995, the VRS Main Staff coordinated Pretis’ production of fourteen modified air-bombs for the SRK, as well as fifteen modified air-bombs for the VRS’s 27th Logistics Base. The next day, it made a separate arrangement for the VRS’s 35th Logistics Base to deliver twenty-nine air-bombs to Pretis so they could be modified with rocket motors and thereafter be supplied to the 27th Logistics Base. On 28 June 1995, it planned Pretis’ delivery of five air-bombs to the Ilidža Brigade, a unit that was part of the SRK. 

1108.    The VJ General Staff further assisted the VRS with additional aspects of firing these weapons. Mladić’s diary indicates as “resolved” an apparent request to Vuković for an aerial bomb launcher. Witness MP-14 testified that Grad engines were used to launch modified air-bombs. The record demonstrates that the VJ General Staff supplied certain Grad engines to the VRS, as Vuković “ordered” that 200 Grad engines “be handed over to VRS” in June 1995. 

Trial judgment
6. Provision of Fuel

1109.    A memorandum from the 1st Krajina Corps Command outlines the procedure for VRS units obtaining fuel from the FRY based on guidelines from the VJ General Staff and VRS Main Staff: “Issue of fuel will be done on the Yugoslav Army filling stations as follows: a) Diesel fuel D-2 on the ‘Topčider’ barracks filling station. b) Gasoline fuel MB-98 on the 	VJ General Staff Headquarters Administration filling station”. General Mladić also believed that the VRS could obtain fuel from the 608th Logistics Base of the VJ. 

1110.    In an intercepted conversation between Vuković and Slobodan Milošević on 2 May 1995, Vuković recounted that General Mladić had complained about the VRS’ fuel shortage being “a big problem”, and Vuković noted that 700 tonnes of fuel were at the customs office, waiting to be delivered to the VRS. 

1111.    On 16 June 1995, the SRK Command wrote to the VRS Main Staff asking permission to import 38,600 litres of fuel for itself and 12,400 litres for the Igman Infantry Brigade. The letter specifies that the transfer had been approved by the VJ General Staff. 

1112.    Pursuant to Vuković’s confidential directives, the VJ routinely issued fuel for particular VRS vehicles, including those transporting Mladić, Milan Gvero and other VRS Generals. As previously mentioned, the Trial Chamber also heard testimony that the VJ dispatched convoys of civilian trucks to deliver fuel to the VRS. 

1113.    Certain documents stipulate that Vuković approved the provision of 2,000kg of “oil, type UAMS”, 5,000 kg of “oil, type ZUON” and 2,000 litres of “HUNT-S” oil. 

1114.    Hence, the Trial Chamber does not deem Siniša Borović credible in his claim that “ s upplying the Army of Republika Srpska and the Army of Republic of Serbian Krajina with fuel in an organised manner was not something that was carried out by the VJ ”. 

1115.    However, in assessing the provision of fuel, the Trial Chamber has also chosen not to rely on various documents on provision of fuel lacking the indicia of reliability discussed above, as they do not convincingly show that the procurement was part of the logistical assistance process approved by Vuković and the VJ General Staff in conjunction with the VRS Main Staff. 
7. Lack of Payment for Military Supplies

1116.    Borislav Vuković’s directives referred to “Economic assistance” and “Financial assistance” from the VJ to the VRS and did not mention the need for remuneration. At the monthly coordination meetings that Vuković chaired, Mladić informed the audience of the VRS’s needs and asked for the VJ’s help. Vuković referred on various occasions to giving supplies to the VRS. Ðukić’s statement further demonstrates that the object of his meetings with Vuković at the headquarters of the VJ General Staff in Belgrade was to solicit aid free of charge. Indeed, the aforestated material lists make no reference to payment. Instead, a dispatch note reflects the VJ General Staff’s order that “ammunition is to be issued free of charge”. 

1117.    Mladić himself told the RS National Assembly that nearly half of the VRS’s total ammunition was provided by the VJ “as humanitarian aid”. The only reasonable inference from this language is that this ammunition was not paid for. Mladić further distinguished ammunition procured through VJ “aid” from purchased ammunition. Ðorđe Ðukić himself stated that the RS MOD paid FRY manufacturers only “ occasionally”. Milan Babić too explained that RS did not pay for certain weapons because it lacked sufficient funds, as he witnessed after participating in a meeting with Karadžić and other individuals. Tellingly, a VRS Main Staff tabular report of ammunition obtained in 1994 does not indicate a price next to the ammunition obtained from the VJ, whereas it includes a price next to the ammunition separately procured from the RS government. 

1118.    In the course of Mladić and Vuković’s visit to the Krušik weapons factory, Vuković was recorded as explaining that the object of the meeting was to see “what we can offer as assistance”, “what can be delivered with and without payment” and “what is possible by way of compensation”, thereby demonstrating that part of the weaponry supplied to the VRS was free of charge and part was paid for.

1119.    VRS weapons produced by Pretis were tested at no cost at the VJ’s Technical Testing Centre at Nikinci, as reported by the RS Minister of Defence: “ The use of the training ground/s in the territory of the FR Yugoslavia was carried out free of charge, with all available equipment, means, and necessary manpower. There was never a single case of the military controllers from Republika Srpska encountering any lack of understanding whatsoever”. 

1120.    On 15 January 1995, the VRS Main Staff reported that the VJ had “selflessly been offering us humanitarian assistance and services which are extremely important for Republika Srpska”, and encouraged the RS Prime Minister to offer the VJ “a gift, at least once, as a token of our gratitude and attention”, namely “2000m³ of lumber” for the VJ’s purposes. 

1121.    Payment was demanded in certain cases. On 16 March 1994, the SDC concluded: “Given that in 1994 military industry production is the only source of weapons and military equipment supplies, Republika Srpska and the RSK must provide the necessary funds for their needs”. Similarly, after Mladić wrote to the VJ General Staff to propose that a factory in Kruševac, Serbia, produce a disabling chemical agent (“CS”) for its anti-sabotage and anti-terrorist activities, Vuković’s Chief of Cabinet responded:







We agree that this is a very important substance and that the procedure on getting the final product should be accelerated. ... Since the final products are needed by both the VJ and the VRS, and since we are talking of urgent needs, and everything is made more complicated due to the difficulties in securing the finances, it would be appropriate that, in order to accelerate the whole process and the set up of the section of a factory and the production of the chemical agent , the GŠ VRS Main Staff participated in financing the set up of the section of a factory according to its means, in the part where the cost is borne by the investor. 





In this instance, the VJ General Staff expected the VRS Main Staff to pay for the production of the chemical agent “according to its means”, thereby suggesting that the VJ General Staff would cover the remaining amount. The Defence argues that it cannot be known whether this chemical agent was produced by “the military part of the plant or the civilian part of the plant”. Regardless of how production was technically arranged at the factory, the Trial Chamber finds that the correspondence plainly demonstrates that the agent was produced for military purposes and that the VJ General Staff was involved in the process.

1122.    A November 1995 report by the RS MOD stated that the assistance from state-owned military companies in FRY was linked to its ability to pay for their services. The same report nonetheless posited that the VJ assented to an agreement that would “help” the VRS by “covering all costs and debts” that the RS had incurred in its dealings with the VJ General Staff’s Čačak facility “from the beginning of the war to the end of 1994”, the debt amounting to “about four million dinars”. The VJ had also “allowed the VRS to use the facilities and services of the Moma Stanojlović Airforce Complex in Batajnica for free from the beginning of the war until the end of 1994”. The VJ-VRS agreement encompassed the “delivery of essential spare parts, assembly sets and machinery from their stores, technical documentation and all other forms of assistance for the Army of Republika Srpska to fight successfully”, manifestly free of charge. 

1123.    Free assistance from the VJ was crucial to the VRS because its financial situation was “extremely poor” and had worsened between August 1994 and November 1995, partly due to the FRY’s “economic blockade” against RS. “ Financial resources were certainly not sufficient to satisfy the VRS ’s overall requirements”, which led to the “ impossibility of compensation” for certain supplies. 

1124.    On the other hand, the RS MOD technically had to purchase supplies it obtained from FRY special purpose industries, such as Prvi Partizan in U`ice, Sloboda in Čačak and Krušik in Valjevo. Unlike the VJ, the FRY state companies that delivered military supplies to the VRS’s Koran Depot always sent an invoice for payment. Invoices were submitted to the RS MOD. Notably, on 27 June 1993, the VRS Main Staff reported having made a contract to buy 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan and to have 1 million damaged shells overhauled by the Fasau company, also based in U`ice; and asked the RS MOD for permission to conduct these transactions. On 22 February 1993, the 1stKrajina Corps Command notified the VRS Main Staff that it had made an agreement to purchase 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan for the sum of 250,000 Deutschmarks. The letter states: “We hereby ask the Main Staff VRS to purchase this same quantity of ammunition or to allow us to buy the aforementioned quantity through donors from municipal assemblies in the zone of the 1stKrajina Corps ”. In July 1994, the SDC indicated that RS and RSK had provided funds for their needs in FRY military materiel. The VRS Main Staff reported that it had spent 1,954,192 dinars on purchasing ammunition between March and December 1994, presumably from the FRY since no evidence establishes that the VRS received ammunition from any other country. 

1125.    In practice, the RS and the VRS had difficulty complying with their contracts whenever the VJ or FRY government demanded payment. As of November 1993, the VRS had a debt of 8 million U.S. dollars to military companies, a situation that “practically prevented further purchases of production material, which comes mainly from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. RS recognised that it was able to effect “very few payments to weapons and ammunition producers, both in Republika Srpska and the FRY”. For instance, in January 1994, the RS MOD advised the VJ General Staff that it could not pay in full its debt of 547,541 German marks for the past overhaul of VRS equipment at the Čačak TRZ. RS proposed to pay only part of the debt in the amount of 135,678 marks while making the following plea: “Taking into consideration the financial situation in the VRS and the situation in the Čačak TRZ, we hope that you will accept our proposal of partial settlement of the debt to the Čačak TRZ”. 

1126.    Jugoslav Kodžopeljić, who oversaw the Čačak facility for the VJ General Staff, insistently claimed that RS systematically paid for services provided by that facility or would otherwise be sued: “It is certain that the Čačak overhaul institute signed contracts, and based on the contracts, payments had to be effected. If payments were not effected, then the commercial court would hear the case and see why the payments had not been effected. I never received information that a payment had not been effected”; “payments were effected in one of the agreed ways. The payment could be the so-called barter, the exchange of certain parts and elements. And I guarantee you that everything was paid. If payment was envisaged, payment was effected ... It is impossible for a payment not to be received because that would merit proceedings to be instituted to recover the debt”. The Trial Chamber does not find Kodžopeljić credible on this point as well. Along with other evidence demonstrating the VRS’ frequent inability to pay, Ex. P1066 and the aforementioned Ex. P1534 directly concern the Čačak facility, and contradict Kodžopeljić’s claim. 

1127.    On 10 January 1994, Vuković warned the SDC that it had failed to take into account the VRS and SVK’s financing needs in logistical assistance, which he estimated at 522 million dollars and 307 million dollars respectively. Vuković still believed that the VRS and SVK should pay for certain supplies, pointing out that “in the current situation there is no chance we can provide assistance to the ones over there, except if they compensate us. For instance, we give them 100,000 pieces of ammunition, they give us the money, we put in the production to produce it”. Slobodan Milošević agreed and noted that Karadžić had agreed to set aside 20 million dollars in reserves from the RS National Bank for such purposes. 

1128.    At a subsequent Supreme Defence Council meeting in June, Vuković reported that the VJ was facing financial difficulties (“reserve supplies have been depleted and we have no money to buy new ones”), and expressed frustration that the VRS and SVK were still not paying for military supplies received from the VJ. He added: “We don’t have anything to give them in these budget conditions because that would directly affect our reserves. If we reduce our reserves, which are minimal, we would put ourselves in danger in case of a conflict on the southern borders towards Albania or in Kosovo itself”. Vuković also criticised the RS and RSK political leadership for relying excessively on funding from the FRY: “ They didn’t earmark any funds for the army, they did this only superficially. They have no laws or a defined budget for the army and so on. They rely solely on us and come to us with demands”. He emphasised: “Most equipment has to be repaired and we do that. This requires considerable funds which we do not have. We propose that they find a solution – we will do the repair, but they have to reimburse the costs either as compensation or otherwise. These costs have amounted to 560,000 DEM in 1993. They haven’t paid a single penny of this amount”. “Another example is reimbursement for fuel. They come here, we give them fuel but we are not reimbursed”. 

1129.    Vuković’s sentiment was echoed by Zoran Lilić, the FRY President, who dismissed a suggestion by Pavle Bulatović – the FRY Defence Minister who technically oversaw the special purpose industries’ contracts – that the VRS and SVK would henceforth pay for the military supplies, as Lilić told Bulatović: “They said the same thing last time, and before that and every time. I think there is no point in discussing this at all”; to which Vuković concurred: “They’re not giving anything”. However, neither Vuković nor the other attendants suggested that the FRY’s logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK should be discontinued. Instead, Vuković stressed that it was necessary to continue helping the VRS and SVK because they would otherwise start losing territories. Vuković went on to encourage the SDC to approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts for the VRS and SVK. 

1130.    Two weeks later, the SDC reiterated: “The Federal Defence Ministry shall use FRY funds, as well as funds secured by RS and the RSK for their needs, to organise the production and purchase of materiel and technical equipment”. But no evidence indicates that these resolutions were enforced and that the VRS and SVK eventually started paying for a significant proportion of the supplies they obtained. Rather, Mihajlović thereafter wrote in a memorandum that the VJ General Staff “approves the redistribution of engineering military equipment and arms, without remuneration”. 

1131.    Towards the end of the war, Vuković said “I could have retained the material reserves” but “ we gave all we had always” and “did not receive a single Dinar for giving”. 

1132.    In 1998, several years after the war, the Krušik military factory in Valjevo, Serbia, informed military post Sarajevo - Han Pijesak, a former VRS base, that it still had to settle its financial debt for 540 mines provided by Krušik in 1994, thereby demonstrating that this materiel was supplied without payment during the war. Another 1998 document indicates that the Bijeljina Special Brigade Police-MUP had yet to settle its debt to Krušik for materiel supplied in 1994. 

1133.    While the bulk of the evidence suggests that the VJ usually gave logistical assistance to the VRS free of charge or at significantly reduced cost, the VRS Krajina Corps reported having purchased in the FRY a total of 3,617,440 bullets of various calibres and 4,618 mines with their own funds. Additionally, in May 1995, General Dragomir Milošević notified the VRS Main Staff that the SRK purchased part of its supplies: “Over the past three or four months we have been obtaining fuel by buying it on the open market in the FRY ... which has been paid for by social funds and businesses in the Corps’ zone of responsibility”. 

1134.    Pretis itself obtained certain materials through sale contracts, although it was atypical for Pretis to purchase materials during the war given the shortage of money to pay for materials. Pretis commonly engaged in “barter agreements” whereby it offered to provide other products as a form of non-monetary payment. 
8. Military Training of VRS Troops

1135.    At the outset, the Defence submits that Vuković had no authority over the training of VRS troops by the VJ, and argues that the decision to train them was made by the SDC, not Vuković. 

1136.    An order by the VJ Chief of General Staff, dated 23 August 1993, regulated the instruction of VRS personnel in target and anti-aircraft shooting at the Pasuljanske Livade base. The Trial Chamber finds, however, that this particular order was presumably issued by Borislav Vuković’s predecessor, as Vuković did not officially become Chief of General Staff before 26 August 1993.

1137.    On 25 December 1993, Momir Bulatović addressed the SDC about the “training of recruits”, emphasising that “we can only do this by observing the law – military cooperation between the FRY and other state entities. We cannot send children there”. Vuković, then serving as VJ Chief of General Staff, agreed: “That’s what we suggested too – to receive them here, train them, and then they can go”. 

1138.    On 16 March 1994, Vuković told the SDC that the VRS and SVK had requested training for their cadets. Vuković noted that the VJ’s academies and schools could train 240 cadets, provided the SDC provided a sufficient budget. Based on Vuković’s advice, the SDC agreed that “240 students shall be enrolled at the Military Academy and the Military College for the needs of the Army of Republika Srpska and the Army of the RSK” and that “funds necessary for their education will be provided by the Federal Government”. 

1139.    On 11 July 1994, referring to non-commissioned officers serving in the VRS, Vuković told the SDC: “we are educating these people; they are completing the academy here; we are sending them there; the president should sign the decree on commissioning them”. Vuković equally participated in an SDC decision stating that “480 students from the 30thand 40thpersonnel centres are to be admitted to courses in VJ military schools and academies”. Petar Škrbić also testified that certain graduates from the VJ Military Academy entered the VRS, although the number decreased during the course of the war. Still, in 1994, for example, the VRS took in 31 non- commissioned officers and 28 officers with the rank of 2ndlieutenant who had graduated from the VJ Military Academy. 

1140.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that Vuković, as the head of the VJ, had authority over the general training process, was supportive of efforts to have the VJ train VRS troops and was involved in the SDC’s decision to authorise this assistance.

1141.    In addition, the Defence submits that the Prosecution has failed to prove that Vuković “exercised any authority with regard to the training of the 10thSabotage Detachment”. 

1142.    According to Dra`en Erdemović, approximately 50 members of the VRS’s 10thSabotage Detachment followed another training course led by VJ officers at the VJ barracks in Pančevo, Serbia, in late November or early December 1994. The training focused on handling ammunition, laying explosives, destroying buildings and general fitness. Erdemović’s account is corroborated by a document referring to the completed “twenty-day training course” for the VRS’s 10thSabotage Detachment in Pančevo, and mentioning an “agreement” for the VJ to dispatch its three instructors to the VRS garrison in Bijeljina, RS, in order to continue the training. When VJ instructors came to Bijeljina, they changed their VJ license plates into VRS plates in order to maintain secrecy, and received permits that would enable them to avoid being stopped at checkpoints. The instructors subsequently travelled to Sarajevo, where they again trained the VRS’s 10thSabotage Detachment in weapon and explosive usage for two to three weeks in early 1995. These training sessions were intended to remain secret. The members of the 10thSabotage Detachment who were trained by the VJ officers participated in the takeover of Vlasenica in July 1995. 

1143.    A February 1995 letter from Dragomir Milošević, the Commander of the SRK, to General Mladić indicates that Vuković approved training of the 10thSabotage Detachment:







We have no officers in the SRK who could provide specialised training with sufficient quality, although there is enough interest in this kind of training. For this reason, we contacted the VJ Special Forces Corps in Belgrade, with the intention have them send us, for a short period, several officers who would provide the specialised part of training on Jahorina with high quality. ... VJ officers agreed to train 20 soldiers for sabotage and reconnaissance operations, and ten soldiers for anti-sabotage and anti-terrorist operations. Accommodations and meals would be provided in Pančevo Serbia ... We hereby ask you to obtain approval through General VUKOVIĆ, so that the VJ Special Forces Corps could provide the training. As they stated, based on the said approval, training is already being provided to the 10thDIO Sabotage and Reconnaissance Detachment of the GŠ VRS Main Staff. 





1144.    Besides Dragomir Milošević’s letter, the Trial Chamber recalls that Vuković had authority over the VJ’s training of VRS troops, and therefore finds that the only reasonable conclusion is that Vuković authorised the training of the 10thSabotage Detachment.

1145.    The Trial Chamber was presented with additional evidence concerning the VJ’s training of VRS troops and Vuković’s approval thereof.

1146.    On 30 August 1993, VJ General Ljubomir Bajić wrote to the FRY MOD in regard to the imminent arrival of 264 VRS servicemen to continue their training in target and anti-aircraft shooting, as approved by Vuković. General Bajić specified that the VRS troops would cross the RS-FRY border “wearing plain clothes”, and asked the FRY MOD to “make sure with the Serbia MUP that the VRS personnel cross the border unimpeded”. 

1147.    In 1993 and 1994, the VJ’s 72ndBrigade trained VRS special forces, teaching them how to implement special tactics and how to handle special weapons and equipment. The VRS special forces were allowed to keep the weapons that the VJ gave them for their training, such as snipers and other special weapons. The staff of the VJ 72ndBrigade that conducted the training considered that it was normal to provide the VRS with these weapons because the VJ and VRS were the same army. Vuković and other VJ commanders attended certain training sessions to monitor the progress of the VRS special forces and to see if further training supplies were needed. 

1148.    Similarly, the VJ General Staff provided a month of training in reconnaissance and sabotage to the VRS and SVK in Banja Luka in April 1994. As reflected in the official gazette, the VJ arranged to send an officer to RS in order to train the Drina Corps’ Zvornik Light Infantry Brigade in reconnaissance and sabotage between 1 September and 30 November 1993, as well as another officer to continue training between 8 November 1993 to 7 March 1994. 

1149.    On 20 April 1995, Vuković’s Cabinet approved Mladić’s demand that two VJ officers from the Pančevo Security and Intelligence Training Centre be allowed to continue their training of VRS commanding officers at the Banja Luka Military School Centre until 3 May 1995. On 19 May 1995, the VJ General Staff approved the VRS’s request for a specialist to provide sniper training to VRS soldiers and their instructors. Kadijević identified Vuković’s initials on the document, acknowledged that the sniper instructor would train the instructors of other snipers, and explained that the sniper instructor was “sent to the 30thPersonnel Centre, which is where officers were sent within the Army of Yugoslavia in order to send them to the VRS”. 

1150.    VRS troops were regularly trained by VJ units in Pančevo, Serbia. The VJ provided a training course for the saboteurs of the East Bosnia Corps between 15 and 30 April 1994. In May 1994, the VRS made arrangements to send three soldiers to attend a 15-day VJ training in reconnaissance and sabotage. Between 25 July and 10 August 1994, 30 soldiers of a Drina Corps manoeuvre battalion were scheduled for training. The Drina Corps Command specified that“ reception, accommodation, food and training of the soldiers shall be regulated by the Yugoslav Army Special Units Corps Command”. Drina Corps Units were expected to be trained in air defence firing between 24 August and 10 September 1994. Another report notes that VRS soldiers were trained in using shells in September 1994. The VRS and VJ also made arrangements to train “30 combatants” of the Drina Corps in 1994. Following a separate arrangement, Vujadin Popović reported that the VJ had agreed to give a three-month “security” training to an unspecified number of Drina Corps “subordinate officers”, starting in March 1995. 

1151.    A subsequent order from Dragomir Milošević refers to the “education of officers and non- commissioned officers” of the SRK by the VJ. Another dispatch from him stipulates that the VJ has consented to train SRK units in policing and reconnaissance necessary for combat operations. 

1152.    Various other exhibits document the VJ’s regular training of VRS troops in various locations. A VRS report recounts how “VJ senior officers” trained 42 VRS soldiers in tactical fire and in operating artillery and hand-held rocket launchers in Batajnica, near Belgrade, in December 1994. The report indicates that the VJ expended significant resources in this training: “Besides the classroom training, that is, theoretical part of the training, we had organised a daily plane fly- over, which gave us exceptional conditions for the monitoring and the training with real targets, arriving and departing”. The VJ provided training to ten marksmen of the 1stKrajina Corps. The VJ conducted training sessions on operating anti-aircraft light artillery for the 1stKrajina Corps, the Drina Corps, and SRK. In December 1993, the VRS asked the VJ General Staff to provide military experts to give a presentation at a conference entitled “VRS: material support, the situation, requirements and possibilities”, which would be attended by top VRS officers. The requested VJ experts had previously provided training to the VRS and “carried out their task impeccably”. 

1153.    Dragomir Milošević stressed that VJ training of SRK units was necessary to “ensure the best possible results in the fight against poturicas”, a derogative term for Muslims. He admitted that the SRK lacked officers to provide specialised training. Another SRK request to the VJ states: “Since we do not have appropriate personnel, we ask that the training instructors bring the training curriculum with them”. 

1154.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that Vuković authorised the VJ to regularly train VRS troops.
9. Other Sources of Logistics

1155.    In assessing whether the VRS received substantial assistance from the VJ, it is necessary to consider the extent to which the VRS relied on logistics from separate sources.
(a) Supplies and Training from Other Countries

1156.    The Pretis factory procured part of its steel from Slovenia and Russia. Pretis received some of its gunpowder from Slovenia in addition to Serbia. At a relatively early stage of the war, RS and RSK further agreed on a protocol designed to facilitate cooperation in the exchange and production of ammunition and military equipment, although the evidentiary record does not establish that this protocol led to significant exchanges.

1157.    At a meeting on 15 March 1994 in Belgrade, Mladić intimated to Slobodan Milošević and Zoran Lilić, among others, that FRY assistance was important because of the “impossibility of importing” from other countries. Mladić then suggested that efforts be made to obtain assistance from additional “friendly and neutral states”. 

1158.    According to Ðorđe Ðukić, the VRS had contacts with officials from Russia’s Directorate for the Export of Military Material, who offered to aid with ammunition, mines and other explosive devices. Mladić and Ðukić visited Russia respectively in March 1995 and December 1995 in order to make arrangements for aid. The Defence relies on Ðukić’s statement to contend that the VRS actually obtained mines, ammunition and explosives from Russia. Ðukić stated that no weaponry was supposed to be obtained from these Russian contacts until after 15 January 1996, a date following the end of the Indictment period. And Ðukić did not even know whether an agreement was ultimately reached. No evidence establishes that the VRS obtained weaponry from Russia.

1159.    Dušan Kovačević, the former RS Defence Minister, was contacted by Israel’s Mossad around March 1995 “about quite a large number of Mujahedin being dispatched to Bosnia- Herzegovina”. In this respect, Mladić’s diary reads: “From Israel– they offer joint combat against extreme Islam – offer the training of our men in Greece at their expense. They offer us special weapons for 500 men – snipers for free – they said it came to Bihać, I don’t know whether it was given to Serbia”. Kovačević specified that Israel’s offer of assistance only applied to the VRS’s fight against the mujahedins. But no evidence was presented that Israel’s offer of assistance was actually fulfilled.

1160.    Similarly, Mladić’s diary mentions unfruitful efforts to try and procure ammunition from Greece: “Agreement regarding take-over of ammunition from Greece – they are not very interested; they are very difficult regarding this; they are being followed by the CIA”. 

1161.    The Defence argues that “ members of the VRS not only attended schools and academies in Belgrade but also those in such countries as Greece and France”, for which it cites Milenko Jevđević. However, Jevđević was speaking of training from September 1998 to August 1999, several years after the Bosnian war. The Trial Chamber therefore does not find this evidence relevant and supportive of the Defence’s claim.

1162.    Witness MP-14 testified that Pretis used certain “French bombs” in order to manufacture modified air-bombs. MP-14 did not specify if these bombs were imported from France before or during the war, or whether they were assembled based on a French technical model, or procured otherwise. No evidence was presented at trial that the VRS obtained logistical assistance from France during the war.

1163.    Ned Krayishnik, a Serb individual who had emigrated to Canada before the war, fundraised money in Canada’s Serb community and personally delivered roughly $45,000 for RS interests, including the military, “the media and propaganda”. Certain other individuals from the Serb diaspora made donations too. 

1164.    In April 1993, the VRS Main Staff noted that “there are no imports, except from the FRY”. Similarly, a November 1993 report by the VRS Main Staff and RS MOD did not identify any country providing logistical assistance besides the FRY: “Since the beginning of combat operations, the VRS has relied on several different supply sources. The basic sources of supply included the Army’s own reserve, the Republic reserve, Republika Srpska’s production, and various forms of assistance from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. By the same token, when General Mladić identified the sources of VRS weaponry in his report to the RS National Assembly, he did not specify that any aid had been provided by any country besides the FRY through the VJ. 

1165.    Michael Williams, the UNPROFOR Director of Information, reviewed all classified reports in the UN’s possession and never saw a “report or even an allegation that the VRS was supplied by some force other than Yugoslavia or other than Serbia”. Further, as indicated by his remarks during an SDC session, Borislav Vuković himself did not believe that the VRS had another significant source of assistance: “They rely solely on us and come to us with demands”. In an interview conducted after the war, Vuković said, while referring to the FRY, RS and RSK, that there was “one single army” that “was getting its logistics support mostly from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia”. 

1166.    Ivan Ðokić, the Defence’s expert witness on logistical assistance, whose testimony is discussed in a separate section, advanced in his report that, besides the FRY, “the most probable sources of supply” for RS were Israel, Russia and Ukraine. To support, Ðokić cited an article from the Stockholm Peace Research Institute (SPRI). The SPRI article provides a “summary of possible/suspected sources” of arms to the VRS during the war and lists “FRY, Israel, Russia, Ukraine” as sources. This statement by the SPRI did not rely on primary investigation or direct evidence of arms transfers. The SPRI noted that “Bosnian Serb forces are also reported to have received weapons shipments organized by Russian intermediaries, including D-30 artillery pieces and T-72 tanks”. For this proposition the SPRI report cited a report from “Jane’s Global Update”, which is not part of the trial record. The SPRI report also posited that “there are reports that the intelligence services of Ukraine, Greece and Israel, supplied arms to Bosnian Serb forces”. For support it cited a report by the Netherlands Institute for War Documentation, which similarly is not in evidence. The Trial Chamber finds that the SPRI report’s listing of Israel, Russia and Ukraine as “possible/suspected sources” lacks weight since it does not rest on primary investigation or direct evidence, but on reports that are not part of the evidentiary record.

1167.    In sum, the trial record conclusively demonstrates that the FRY was the VRS’s primary source of weaponry. The evidence of material from other sources does not raise a reasonable doubt that the FRY was the primary source of weaponry, as the trial record shows that the VRS obtained no more than a limited proportion of its weaponry from any country other than the FRY.

1168.    On the other hand, the trial record shows that the VRS procured appreciable quantities of fuel from the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna and RSK. According to Ðorñe Ðukić, the RS government made arrangements to purchase fuel from “Croatian representatives” in mid-1993, thereby leading to the delivery of 7,000 to 10,000 tonnes of fuel to the VRS. Ðukić apparently alluded to representatives of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna. While Ðukić mentioned that these trade arrangements ended by the beginning of 1995, smaller quantities were subsequently obtained from Croatian sources at the local level. Kovačević concurred with Ðukić’s account but stated that the VRS had provided ammunition in exchange for the fuel. 

1169.    A document authored by General Milivoj Petković of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna also refers to providing oil to RS authorities in exchange for unspecified other products. Around the same time frame, the Defence Council of the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna addressed a letter to the RS MOD concerning over 1.5 million rounds and approximately 4,000 shells, among other equipment. It states that the Croat Republic of Herceg-Bosna would “take charge of the items” supplied by RS, which appears to have been the sender, not the recipient. 

1170.    In August 1994, the VRS Main Staff equally reached an agreement with the RSK government to obtain 25,000 litres of D-2 fuel and 15,000 litres of MB fuel from the RSK’s reserves. Milomir Kovačević also advanced that the VRS obtained part of its fuel from Bulgaria and Romania. 

1171.    Pyers Tucker deemed that the only logical place where the VRS’s fuel could possibly come from was the FRY. His testimony is not convincing in this regard because the VRS had other sources of fuel. However, the trial record does not establish that the VRS obtained significant quantities of weaponry from any country beside the FRY.
(b) Weaponry Purchased Directly from FRY Military Factories

1172.    In addition to the weaponry supplied free of charge from the VJ’s reserves, the VRS technically had to purchase the distinct quantity of weaponry it obtained directly from the FRY military factories (special purpose industries), which were officially managed by the FRY MOD. 

1173.    Mladić reported to the RS National Assembly that, with regard to weaponry used in battle from the beginning of the war until 15 April 1995, merely 9.11% of the total infantry ammunition was “imported, i.e. bought” whereas 47.2% came from VJ “aid”, only 0.26% of expended artillery ammunition was imported/bought whereas 34.4% came from VJ “aid”, and 4.9% of anti-aircraft ammunition was imported/bought whereas 52.4% came from VJ “aid”. 

1174.    Mladić did not specify from which country the “imported, i.e. bought” weaponry came. The trial record solely establishes that the VRS received ammunition from the VJ and the FRY special purpose industries. No evidence establishes that the VRS received ammunition from any country other than the FRY. Insofar as the “imported, i.e. bought” weaponry came from FRY special purpose industries, Mladić’s report demonstrates that a far greater proportion of the VRS’s ammunition came from VJ “aid” than from the special purpose industries, as demonstrated by the vast majority of the evidence at trial. For example, a VRS annual report shows that the VJ provided the majority of the VRS’s infantry ammunition in 1994, as well as approximately a fourth of its shells, whereas the rest came “ f rom the RS Government”. That report does not identify the FRY’s special purpose industries or the FRY MOD as a source of supply.
(c) Ammunition Reserves in Republika Srpska

1175.    According to a VJ General Staff report prepared for the international community, the JNA left behind 72,390 shells and 5,791 rounds of various types after it withdrew from BiH territory. In addition, prior to his appointment as RS Minister of Defence in January 1993, Dušan Kovačević worked on logistical matters for the VRS and participated in a commission assessing the state of VRS reserves that concluded its work in November 1992. Kovačević testified that ammunition was available in the Rudo, Višegrad, Ustikolina and Renovica depots. In his view, “ towards the end of 1991, there was anything between 16.000 and 19.000 tonnes of ammunition which belonged to the reserves of the Supreme Command of the JNA”. 







About 50 per cent of that quantity – or rather, between 8-, and 9.000 tonnes of ammunition from those depots were transported to the territory of Yugoslavia. About 8.000 tonnes remained either in the depots or most of it was distributed across the territory and stored in somewhat smaller depots. ... I n the general area of Podrinje there were about 8.000 tons of various kinds of ammunition. ... I n the Mrkonjić Grad depot, I personally saw that about 1.000 tonnes of different calibre of ammunition were stored there after having been transported from Slovenia and Croatia. About 1500 tonnes of ammunition had been brought over there from the Konjić and Gabela depots. Also, about 1.000 tonnes of ammunition was transported there from the territorial Defence of Bosnia-Herzegovina which had previously been stored in the JNA depots, and, subsequently, all of that was taken over by the VRS. 





1176.    In November 1993, the VRS Main Staff and RS MOD mentioned that, aside from FRY assistance and military production in RS, reserves were one of the “basic sources of supply”. In briefing the RS National Assembly on weaponry used during the war until April 15 1995, General Mladić identified the following sources of supply: total infantry ammunition (1.49% RS production, 42.2% reserves, 9.11% imports/purchases and 47.2% VJ “aid”), total artillery ammunition (26.2% RS production, 39% reserves, 0.26% imports/purchases and 34.4% VJ “aid”), total anti-aircraft ammunition (none from RS production, 42.7% reserves, 4.9% imports/purchases and 52.4% VJ “aid”). Mladić’s report therefore stipulates that reserves were a significant source of weaponry besides VJ “aid”.

1177.    The Defence argues that Mladić’s figures are flawed because he deliberately underestimated ammunition reserves in RS in order to demand more logistical assistance. The Defence notably cites statements by Milan Ninković and Dušan Kovačević for this proposition. 

1178.    After Mladić’s presentation to the RS National Assembly, Ninković, Kovačević’s successor as Defence Minister, intervened to state that Mladić’s data should have been “harmonised” with data in the possession of the RS MOD. “ We do not accept that part and, excuse me, I claim that it is not true”, Ninković said. Ninković did not provide figures to support his position. According to Kovačević, “ almost always most of the deputies felt that the requests were exaggerated, that Republika Srpska was unable to meet them, and that the VRS ought to take a more reasonable stance in that regard”. Branko Simić, a deputy, also contested Mladić’s presentation to the RS National Assembly, telling him that he “had no insight into the materiel supplies of the Serbian army” and was unfamiliar with how much was given by local sources in RS. 

1179.    The Trial Chamber is mindful of the fact that this disagreement occurred in the context of ongoing tensions between, on one side, the VRS Main Staff and Mladić, and on the other side the political branch, namely the RS Presidency and MOD that Ninković and Kovačević represented. Relations between Mladić and Karadžić had become “quite tense” and were marked by clashes and “personal resentment” so that Karadžić unsuccessfully tried to have the Supreme Command dismiss or remove Mladić from his position in the spring of 1995. 

1180.    Kovačević likewise posited that Mladić’s assessment before the RS National Assembly was incorrect since it did not incorporate RS MOD data:







We had information to the effect that a far larger amount of assets had been produced in the RS. We also had information indicating that a far greater quantity of goods had been imported. Having been the ones who paid for them, we had accurate information about it. We also had figures indicating the quantities held in the reserves belonging to the former JNA, and we also had figures about the amount of proceeds from the purchases done by municipalities and local authorities. 





1181.    Kovačević added that “ i n the course of the war, nobody ever responded to my request and explain what had happened to that ammunition. Everybody knew that that ammunition had been distributed across the territory and that that ammunition was under the control of the local brigades and the local authorities”. Kovačević stated that certain reserves “were being kept a secret from the VRS Main Staff” because VRS units “at lower levels, at the levels of brigade, had been hiding their resources and giving false images of resources to Mladić”. Kovačević added that, at the end of 1993, the VRS still had sufficient reserves of ammunition and “ there were only a couple of types of ammunition that were in short supply”. Kovačević acknowledged that the VRS faced a shortage of supplies from 1994 onwards, but claimed that it was not a genuine issue because the VRS Main Staff misevaluated its ammunition needs and existing reserves:







From the start of 1994, the problem of shortage of ammunition and fuel became gradually more prominent. This was a problem that I personally and the members of the Main Staff were confronted with because we received requests for ammunition. I believed the requests to be exaggerated and unrealistic. Such quantities of ammunition were neither necessary nor was it easy to obtain them in such quantities at such short notice. I normally instructed them to go to apply to their local brigades and to inspect the weapons depots they had, but they would see that they had ammunition in enough – in sufficient quantities which could be used in a rational manner, rather than applied to the state to use its resources to obtain ammunition that was already there. 





1182.    The Trial Chamber does not discount the fact that the VRS had access to significant military reserves left behind by the JNA upon its withdrawal from Bosnia or that some VRS units may have miscommunicated the state of their supplies to the VRS Main Staff. It is conceivable that Mladić’s figures were somehow exaggerated or otherwise not entirely accurate. However, the Trial Chamber does not find Kovačević credible in generally claiming that the VRS did not face critical shortages of ammunition. Not only is it plausible that Mladić and VRS commanders were in a better position than the RS MOD to assess the needs for their own operations and the level of reserves in military depots, but Kovačević’s depiction of the VRS reserves as generally satisfactory is contradicted by the great bulk of the evidence adduced at trial.

1183.    A September 1992 report from VRS General Ðorde Ðukić emphasised: “The SRJ reserves are limited”. The large quantity of ammunition left behind by the JNA at the Koran Depot was itself depleted by the end of 1992. In April 1993, the VRS Main Staff described the state of its ammunition reserves as “very bad”, “critical” and in need of replenishment, stating: “Reserves of material resources, starting with those of significance for the troops, are exhausted, some have also been destroyed, so that their continued supply cannot be guaranteed without external intervention, importation, production or something similar”. 

1184.    In July 1993, General Manojlo Milovanović, Deputy Chief of Staff for the VRS Main Staff, informed the VJ General Staff that the VRS had been involved in intense fighting in the past six months and was in need of assistance: “ We spent huge quantities of material means which we cannot replenish from our own resources”; and proceeded to request over a million bullets and over a thousand shells and rockets. Nevertheless, Kovačević asserted that Milovanović’s assessment that the VRS’s own resources were essentially depleted was incorrect. 

1185.    An excerpt from General Mladić’s diary, dated 17 August 1993, states that “ feeding the army is a problem, as are fuel and ammunition”, and that “ material reserves have been exhausted”. In November 1993, the VRS Main Staff and RS MOD—headed by Kovačević himself—similarly reported that the substantial consumption of supplies was depleting the army’s reserves and incoming replenishments from the FRY:







The level of consumption in the Army, during the passed period, kept exceeding the level of supplies of technical equipment and materiel received from our production and from the various forms of assistance from the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. This increased the Army’s consumption of both its own reserve and products from the state reserve, which caused the lack of certain means, especially quartermaster means to be felt in some units as early as the first half of 1993. The shortage was partially overcome through the use of local resources, municipalities, and a number of companies and other economic organisations. 





1186.    Mladić emphasised in November 1993 as well that “ the Material Reserves of the Army, as the main source of supply from the beginning of the war until present, have been exhausted”. “Of 148 types of ammunition, 35% of these, the reserves of artillery and PA ammunition is zero”. Mladić further described the VRS’s general material situation as “alarming”, stating that “the situation has been deteriorating and threatens to endanger the results achieved so far”. Kovačević nonetheless advanced that Mladić’s assessment was unreliable because existing reserves were not taken into account since the Ministries of Finance and Defence were not consulted. Yet, a report from Kovačević’s own MOD found that the state of material support for the VRS was “poor” and “deteriorating” in November 1993, and stressed that “systematic solutions must be found to ensure that the Army received regular supplies of all the items it needs”. 

1187.    Another contemporaneous report presents a dismal assessment of the situation faced by the 1stKrajina Corps, noting that “ e stablishment reserves in food, clothing, ammunition, fuel, spare parts and other necessities were used up a long time ago”, adding: “With /only/ about 100 tonnes of fuel available monthly or three to four tonnes daily, it is difficult to carry out tasks in peacetime, let alone in time of war. The situation is the same with food, clothing, ammunition and so on, while some other functions of logistics support are at a complete standstill”. 

1188.    On 15 March 1994, at a meeting in Belgrade with Slobodan Milošević, Zoran Lilić and Radovan Karadžić, among others, Mladić stated: “we have a major problem of a very scanty logistical support for the army in all areas owing to the exhaustion of the reserves, dwindling resources … obsolescence of some of the equipment … . I am certain that we must do all we can to supply the army with ammunition, new systems of RT /military hardware/”. 

1189.    In May 1994, Radovan Karadžić wrote to Vuković to express grave concern about the VRS’s material situation:







Our army is exhausted and stretched out over a long front line. This too could be overcome however, but the shortage of every type of ammunition cannot be overcome but through the provision of ammunition. At some military lines, our soldiers are awaiting enemy infantry attacks with /just/ one or two ammunition clips in /their/ automatic rifles, respectively. ... This, however, is a problem for the prime minister, but it does not hurt for you to know this as well.









General, Sir, I kindly request that you inform yourself through our GŠ /Main Staff/ about the equipment situation and you will realize that it is worse than what I could write you in a telegram. The consequences are grave already while they can become tragic, also. 





Kovačevič contended that the evaluation of the VRS’s situation made by Karadžić, his superior, was unreliable. 

1190.    On 3 May 1995, Dragomir Milošević expressed concern about the SRK’s situation and asked for the VJ’s immediate provision of weaponry and ammunition: “We find ourselves in a situation where there is a great shortage of the requested items .... We need the items ... very urgently”. Milošević proceeded to dispatch a special representative to Belgrade to facilitate the procurement process. He thereafter requested another 200 aerial bombs from the VJ General Staff. 

1191.    On 23 August 1995, Mladić gave a presentation to the SDC in Belgrade and warned that the VRS faced “a lack of ammunition, particularly for high-calibre artillery weapons”. On 3 September 1995, Mladić wrote to the VJ General Staff to ask for firearms and ammunition, stating: “The weapons are necessary for the purpose of equipping the newly arrived conscripts from the FRY thus we ask you kindly to approve this. There is particularly a shortage of the ammunition we requested and we are not able to supply our units in accordance with the needs; and now it is necessary because the enemy’s offensive is in its full peak”. 

1192.    On 7 October 1995, Mladić asked Vuković for ten aerial bombs and stipulated “we do not have any such ammunition”. In November 1995, the RS MOD wrote that, “ with regard to material supplies for the VRS , the situation is even worse than with financing the army . Previous stocks have already been exhausted and the level of ammunition, explosive, weapons, military equipment, fuel and other material supplies is critical”; the VRS faces the “exhaustion of and inability to replenish stockpile reserves to conduct the war”. Mladić’s notes from a VRS Main Staff meeting on 7 December 1995, read: “The PoOb /logistics support/ situation is very critical. Food is the most critical”. Ðukić likewise recognised that the VRS was facing a “difficult material situation” in late 1995. 

1193.    Furthermore, numerous exhibits indicate that the VRS heavily depended on supplies from the VJ, thereby demonstrating that the VRS’s reserves were insufficient. On 30 January 1994, Mladić requested over 12 million bullets and over 12,000 pieces of artillery ammunition from the VJ General Staff, asserting that these supplies “are necessary for combat security and supplying of units engaged in combat operations”. In May 1995, Mladić asked Vuković to provide 10,000 mines and 5 tonnes of plastic explosives because the VRS lacked a sufficient quantity for its operations. The following month, Mladić emphasised that, in light of ongoing combat operations in Sarajevo and the Sava river valley, “the expenditure of human and material resources of the VRS had been increased” and “ that is precisely why, at this moment, the material assistance to the VRS from VJ, especially in ammunition, is needed more than ever”. On 19 June 1995, Mladić sent a “very urgent” message to Vuković stating that “the Muslim offensive is still going on strong” and that the SRK had consequently suffered significant casualties and were retreating in the general area of Trnovo, near Sarajevo; and emphasising “we need your urgent help with the following quantities of ammunition”, namely 1,835,850 rounds of various calibres and 2,000 shells. 

1194.    The SRK Command similarly admitted its dependence on VJ supplies in early 1995, as it advised the VRS Main Staff that supplies from the VJ were necessary to “replenish” its units with ammunition, describing this support as “essential to our requirements”. On 22 June 1995, the SRK made arrangements to collect 120,000 bullets and 1,850 shells from the VJ, stressing that these supplies were necessary “because the situation on the front is exceptionally difficult”. That month the Zvornik Infantry Brigade itself averred that it was “looking for ammunition with desperate moves”. 

1195.    Borislav Vuković, Slobodan Milošević, Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karadžić themselves believed that the VRS would not have been able to wage war without the VJ’s help, thereby showing that they did not consider the VRS’s reserves sufficient.

1196.    In sum, extensive evidence explicitly states that the VRS’s reserves were verging towards depletion as the war progressed and that the VRS was in serious need of supplies, although Kovačević maintained that the state of these reserves was generally satisfactory and not critical. Kovačević’s point is hardly corroborated and the Trial Chamber does not find it credible in light of the evidentiary record.

1197.    Kovačević’s assertions are equally called into doubt by the record of a July 1994 Supreme Defence Council session. Pavle Bulatović, the FRY Defence Minister, told the SDC that he had met with the Defence Ministers of RSK and RS, namely Kovačević himself. “In their demands”, Bulatović explained, “they were precise and resolute in saying that unless they receive assistance this state will bear responsibility for their future”. Milošević stated in the session: “Kovačević reiterated that the situation is critical for the Republika Srpska and the RSK”, and proposed to enter a contract with FRY special purpose industries to import weapons and military equipment into RS and RSK. (Slobodan Milošević derisively dismissed Kovačević’s proposal, saying that RS and RSK could not enter into a contract directly with FRY special purpose industries but instead had to proceed through the FRY MOD and the VJ General Staff.) This evidence indicates that, contrary to what he testified in court, Kovačević thought that the VRS’s situation was “critical” and that there was an important need to import weaponry from the FRY, thereby showing that RS’s ammunition reserves were not remotely satisfactory.

1198.    The Trial Chamber finds other reasons to doubt Kovačević’s credibility. First, Kovačević was officially a member of the VJ on the 30thPersonnel Center’s payroll, and described himself as a longstanding personal friend of Vuković, which may have impaired his objectivity.

1199.    Second, Kovačević generally denied that military goods continued to be secretly transported across the FRY-RS border and delivered to the VRS after the FRY officially imposed sanctions on RS in August 1994. It is conclusively established that logistical assistance continued and that the sanctions were mostly a façade. The Trial Chamber finds it highly implausible that Kovačević, the former RS Minister of Defence, would not know that fact. It is additionally noteworthy that, when presented with a RS MOD report listing millions of weapons procured during the sanctions period under a compound category of “ p urchases and donations”, Kovačević opined that the purchased weapons must have come from FRY special purpose industries. Kovačević’s explanation therefore contradicted his own claim that weapons generally could not cross the border during the sanctions period. 

1200.    Third, notwithstanding his senior membership in the VRS and service as RS Minister of Defence, Kovačević unbelievably professed not to know that the VRS used aerial bombs in Sarajevo: “Q: To your knowledge, sir, were you aware that the VRS was using aerial bombs in its bombardment of Sarajevo? A: I really don’t know about that, aside from what I read in the media about the shelling itself”. 
(d) Fuel Reserves in Republika Srpska

1201.    According to Siniša Borović, between 20,000 and 70,000 tonnes of fuel were left behind by the JNA in BiH and Croatia. Borović stated that “paramilitary forces” ended up taking possession of these fuel reserves, sometimes overpowering storage crews. Borović described these “paramilitary forces” as Serb, Muslim and Croat units operating outside the framework of the state armed forces. Borović did not state that these reserves were procured by the VRS.

1202.    Dušan Kovačević advanced that the VRS possessed sufficient fuel reserves and did not experience problems until the beginning of 1994. Ðorñe Ðukić, the former VRS Assistant Commander for Logistics, further posited that “there were no problems regarding fuel provision until the beginning of 1995”, when VRS units started submitting “continuous requests to the government for fuel”. Ðukić stated that approximately 40,000 tonnes of fuel and between 1,000 and 1,200 tonnes of kerosene were found in the reserves in the territory of RS. But the reserves Ðukić mentioned would have been insufficient to fulfil the VRS’s needs according to a November 1993 joint report by the RS MOD and VRS Main Staff. The latter stated that the VRS’s “daily need for engine fuel varies around 37,000 litres of diesel fuel and 13,000 litres of super fuel”. This report also suggests that Ðukić’s estimate may have been incorrect, as it stipulates that “fuel reserves were only 24,300 litres of diesel and 13,784 of super”. 

1203.    Another exhibit states that, in October 1995, the VRS Main Staff made arrangements to collect 338,000 litres of D-2 diesel fuel from a depot in Banja Luka. Kovačević testified that this procurement originated from a directorate in charge of commodity reserves. This document suggests that the VRS had access to greater fuel reserves than estimated by the RS MOD and VRS Main Staff joint report two years earlier. On the other hand, this fuel may have been previously delivered to this depot from the FRY, as the record establishes that the VJ was involved in supplying certain VRS depots. 

1204.    The Trial Chamber finds that the exact quantity of fuel available in RS’s reserves cannot be determined on the basis of the record adduced at trial. That being noted, the record otherwise demonstrates that VRS personnel recurrently reported problems due to low levels of fuel, thereby showing that fuel reserves were not sufficient from an early stage of the war.

1205.    In April 1993, the VRS Main Staff reported that the state of fuel and ammunition reserves was “very bad, so that in 1993 it will be necessary to allocate much larger sums to bring the existing ordnance into a good state of repair and replenish material stocks”. Mladić described the fuel situation as “a problem” in his diary in August as well. Mladić concluded in November 1993 that the VRS was facing a fuel shortage because its usage exceeded its replenishments, which could lead vehicles to be grounded:







In Sep and Nov, the army has been provided 984 tonnes of diesel D-2 and 48 tonnes of petrol MB-86 for the Army, and minimal monthly needs are 1100 tonnes of diesel D-2 and 600 tonnes of petrol MB-86. In a couple of days, any movement of the vehicles (combat or ordinary) will be impossible, the Communication centre might stop working, as well as hospitals and bakeries that run on this fuel, etc. 





1206.    The November 1993 RS MOD and VRS Main Staff joint report reiterated that “ the situation is critical enough to ground all vehicles”. 

1207.    In August 1993, the Drina Corps Command noted that some units had not reported the quantities received from individually-owned gas stations and that “ the logical conclusion is that some units even have excess of fuel”. But it noted that fuel otherwise was an issue, as requests for replenishment had generally become more frequent. The Drina Corps Command reckoned that “the problem cannot be resolved because the FRY does not have the corresponding quantities of fuel, due to the stricter embargo measures” and “ d irect purchase of fuel is impossible due to a lack of monetary resources”. 

1208.    The 1stKrajina Corps itself sternly cautioned the VRS Main Staff about that problem: “You are herewith informed and warned that we are not able to perform PoOb /logistical support/ of the units, due to lack of p/g /fuel/ ... If we urgently do not provide fuel for minimal functions, we will be forced to pull over ... on the roads”. Another contemporaneous report by the 1stKrajina Corps restated that it had consumed its fuel reserves and consequently faced difficulties in carrying out its operations. UN intelligence reports similarly indicated that the VRS was “very short of fuel and spare parts”, and Pyers Tucker, a senior officer in the UNPROFOR military command from 1992 to 1993, frequently saw VRS vehicles stopped at roadsides after running out of fuel. 

1209.    In March 1994, Mladić said he was “certain” of the necessity to improve the supply of fuel to the VRS. In May 1994, Radovan Karadžić directly informed Borislav Vuković that the VJ’s assistance was needed because the VRS was running out of fuel. 

1210.    Between August 1994 and November 1995, the RS MOD again reported “numerous problems” due to insufficient fuel. On 8 June 1995, the Zvornik Infantry Brigade reported that it faced a fuel shortage. In December 1995, Mladić noted: “We’re getting by with fuel”. 

1211.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that the evidence establishes that the VRS’s fuel reserves were insufficient to meet its military needs.
(e) Military Factories in Republika Srpska

1212.    The Trial Chamber recalls Mladić’s estimate that military factories in RS were able to produce 26.2% of the total artillery ammunition but only 1.49% of the total infantry ammunition used by the VRS through April 15 1995. Witness MP-14 indeed testified that RS factories lacked the capability to manufacture infantry ammunition. 

1213.    As early as September 1992, the VRS Main Staff had concluded that its situation was “very difficult since all ammunition factories were either closed or working at minimum capacity”. Slightly over a year later, VRS Main Staff and RS MOD again determined that RS was unable to produce sufficient quantities of weaponry at its own military factories and “cope with the high level of wartime consumption”. 

1214.    RS tried to “ensure domestic production of a major portion of the Army’s needs in ammunition, mines and other explosive devices, and military equipment”. Between January and September 1993, RS companies delivered to the VRS 61,580 pieces of artillery missiles, 42,890 mortar shells, 870 rifle grenades, 15,670 hand grenades, 4,200 anti-personnel mines and 1,000 fuses. Yet, RS-based companies struggled to maintain production: “The problem of financing the special purpose industry in Republika Srpska has become not just a restricting factor in executing the planned or agreed level of production, it has also shut down some companies and caused other damages including breakdowns of expensive equipment due to inadequate maintenance etc”. Despite efforts to improve production, “ the level of consumption of both the Army’s material reserves and the Republic Reserve ... was constantly beyond the level of renewing supplies”. The VRS Main Staff indicated that RS’s military industrial production was “a far cry from satisfying the material needs of VRS in 1994”. 

1215.    The VRS Main Staff and RS MOD considered that “the lack of financial means had a catastrophic impact on production for the Army, repairs of weapons and military equipment, supplies, that is, on the Army’s overall entire financial situation”. The production of food and clothes was also problematic due to the lack of financial means and organisation. “The lack of funds ma de it impossible to order clothing and footwear, and many soldiers would therefore enter the winter time half dressed and without adequate footwear”. Mladić too reported that “a large number of soldiers are approaching the winter half-dressed, without adequate or no footwear whatsoever”. Mladić later notified Milošević, Lilić and Karadžić of the “inadequate functioning of the RS economy, primarily special-purpose production”. 

1216.    he VRS equally lacked adequate overhaul and technical facilities in RS. Mladić’s logistics strategic plan specified that the VJ General Staff’s technical maintenance facilities at Kragujevać and Čačak were “to assist with requests from the VRS and SVK Main Staffs”. The VJ General Staff’s overhaul of VRS weaponry, notably at the Kragujevac TRZ, and the supply of spare parts were a necessity for the VRS, as the RS MOD noted: “Only one of the four VRS logistics bases was equipped to carry out mid-echelon repair work, but even these activities were brought into question because of a lack of spare parts”. The RS MOD admitted that it was seeking to remedy this problem partly through the “ e ngagement of repair depots and enterprises from the FRY to repair and maintain material and technical equipment ” and “ use of FRY Army services in this area”. The VRS’s difficulties in repairing equipment were such that Mladić personally wrote to Vuković to urge him to speed up the VJ’s repair of two 130mm guns (“we are in dire need of it”). The VJ complied with the request and offered to repair more 130mm guns for the VRS. Mladić also urgently requested Vuković to dispatch an expert assistance team to fix problems with rockets and an anti-aircraft defence system. Similarly, the VJ General Staff’s Čačak Maintenance and Repairs Depot was involved in repairing military vehicles for the VRS. 

1217.    Vuković himself told the Supreme Defence Council that the VJ played a key role in repairing the VRS’s equipment, asking the following rhetorical question: “Do you think that the technical equipment, which is in Republika Srpska or in the Republic of Serbian Krajina, would be functional if we did not engage the men from these depots?” 

1218.    Even though domestic production and overhaul capabilities were direly insufficient to fulfil the VRS’s needs, RS factories were able to produce or repair, between 18 August 1994 and 1 November 1995, 864,000 rounds of rifle ammunition, 163,508 rounds of other infantry ammunition, 131,071 units of mortar ammunition, 37,849 units of artillery of ammunition, 18,786 units of tank ammunition, 877 missiles and 279 aerial bombs. The Trial Chamber further recalls the evidence concerning the Pretis military factory in RS, which relied on operational support from the VJ General Staff. 
(f) Local Sponsors in Republika Srpska

1219.    Dušan Kovačević stated that RS’s local and municipal authorities, as well as wealthy local entrepreneurs, regularly made donations to VRS units. Local municipalities and companies earmarked certain funds and donated miscellaneous items to assist the VRS. At the 50thSession of the RS National Assembly, Branko Simić, a deputy, told Mladić:







You should visit the Serbian municipalities, I am there every day, certainly with regard to this treatment, I could not do that, and see the sums the Serbian people are giving through the municipalities for the Serbian army ... There are municipalities, General, which have given up to two million and two hundred thousand DEM and from oil to all the necessary articles, even down to the small item of pepper, plus cash. 





1220.    Mladić’s notebook mentions a meeting with representatives of the Sokolac municipality, where a local official mentioned that 150,000 Deutschmarks had been “secured” and that “one parcel” would be given to “every soldier”, presumably as salary. Local sponsors purchased certain quantities of ammunition from FRY special purpose industries as well, providing them to VRS units. Such sponsors were increasingly involved in supplying local VRS units with ammunition after the FRY imposed sanctions on RS. 

1221.    On 22 February 1993, the 1stKrajina Corps Command notified the VRS Main Staff that it had made an agreement to purchase 2 million bullets from Prvi Partizan for the sum of 250,000 Deutschmarks, writing: “We hereby ask the Main Staff VRS to purchase this same quantity of ammunition or to allow us to buy the aforementioned quantity through donors from municipal assemblies in the zone of the 1stKrajina Corps ”. In May 1995, General Dragomir Milošević informed the VRS Main Staff that local sponsors had assisted the SRK in purchasing part of its fuel. Rajko Petrović recalled that, in order to avoid military service, one particular businessman had donated 300,000 Deutschmarks, although Petrović did not know whether he gave the sum to the government or the Serbian Democratic Party. Petrović added that the VRS received numerous donations from local individuals, associations and companies. 

1222.    Kovačević contended that “local-level authorities, such as municipal authorities, were the most important and for the most part permanent donors to their local units, normally brigade-level units”. The evidentiary record does not support Kovačević’s claim that such local sources were the “most important” source of assistance, which strikes the Trial Chamber as a great exaggeration. The record does not establish that the VRS obtained weaponry directly from such local sources but only that they occasionally assisted in the purchase of weapons.

1223.    The difficult economic situation in RS could undercut these efforts, as illustrated by a November 1993 report by the 27thMotorised Brigade Command of the 1stKrajina Corps, which reads: “Business at municipal level (both the public and the private sectors), which has unselfishly assisted our units, is in such a state that it cannot do so anymore”. 
(g) Unauthorised Donations of Weaponry by VJ Personnel

1224.    The Trial Chamber recalls that Vuković instituted disciplinary proceedings against certain VJ commanders who gave military supplies directly to the VRS and SVK without formal permission. In particular, on 22 September 1994, Vuković instituted proceedings against Major General Boro Ivanović, Commander of the VJ Novi Sad Corps, for having violated orders by issuing equipment to the VRS and SVK without official approval, notably 2,320,441 units of infantry ammunition, 11,991 mortar shells and 205,725 litres of fuel. Vuković also suspended Ivanović from duty. Yet, Slobodan Milošević and Zoran Lilić strongly disputed Vuković’s allegations against Ivanović, finding them unsupported by Vuković’s evidence. They severely rebuked Vuković and ordered him to reinstate Ivanović because he should be presumed innocent until proven guilty in proper court proceedings. According to Siniša Borović, who served as Vuković’s Chef de Cabinet, Ivanović was eventually placed in another position and promoted. 
(h) Smuggling

1225.    While Mladić reported that the unauthorised smuggling of VJ materials was a problem, he distinguished it from official logistical assistance:







So far in this war, along with the regular supply of the VRS units and commands in accordance with the PoOb /Logistical Support/ plan, there existed parallel unit supply channels, used not only by authorised persons, but also by various suppliers, donors, and so on. Supplying commands and units through these additional channels resulted in an uncontrolled and unplanned outflow of all kinds of equipment and materiel from the VJ for purposes other than designated resulting in some of it even falling into enemy hands while at the same time, some individuals obtained enormous profit in this way, which justifiably caused profound dissatisfaction amongst the VJ and VRS members. 





1226.    Dušan Kovačević explained that Mladić issued this order pursuant to his request, and remarked on how profiteers were selling weaponry to enemy forces: “This was one of the painful issues to me as an individual and a professional. I could not accept in any way that members of the VRS locally, as well as sponsors, should be selling weapons and ammunition to the opposite side. This was an occurrence that was lethal to the VRS in which nobody wanted genuinely to dispense with [sic] . And it was very detrimental. There are individuals who are still wealthy thanks to the activities dating from that period”. 

1227.    Ðorđe Đukić likewise mentioned hearsay knowledge of “individual cases” of smuggling, such as that of Mirko Krajišnik, who unofficially obtained weapons and ammunition from the FRY for the needs of the Rajlovac Brigade in Sarajevo, and who was rumoured to be a smuggler of weapons and ammunition. Kovačević obtained information about how Krajišnik unlawfully conducted business outside the framework approved by the RS Ministry of Trade, although Kovačević did not believe that Krajišnik became wealthy as a result. Private individuals also smuggled non-military goods from the FRY into RS. 

1228.    Jugoslav Kodžopeljić’s testimony itself suggests that smuggling from VJ facilities to the VRS was far from commonplace, as Kodžopeljić clearly denied knowledge of war profiteering concerning assets of VJ depots he oversaw, namely the Kragujevac and Čačak facilities, stating “I cannot confirm that” and “No, I can’t recall any”. Conversely, Siniša Borović affirmed that the VJ frequently had to block off its own depots to thwart smugglers. 

1229.    Carl Bildt, who served as the European Union co-Chairman of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, testified that a “black market” for weapons existed in Bosnia but was not “major”, adding: “Every war produces, and every sanctions produces black markets. There are always people who are prepared to make money independent of ethnicity and political loyalties in the middle of a war. And in this particular war, there was no difference”. Bildt posited that smuggling primarily concerned fuel, beer and cigarettes, as there was “no need” to smuggle arms and ammunition because there was already an “abundance of weapons” in Bosnia. The Trial Chamber does not find Bildt’s testimony convincing for several reasons. First, Bildt testified that international border monitors along the Drina River did not detect “any major” deliveries of weaponry from the FRY to RS after Milošević agreed to impose an embargo on RS. In fact, the evidentiary record establishes that major deliveries continued surreptitiously, undetected by international border monitors, who were unable to adequately control the border for either smuggling or secretive logistical assistance from the VJ. Second, Bildt’s assessment that there was “no need” to smuggle weaponry into Bosnia is amply contradicted by the evidence concerning the VRS’s dwindling reserves and its recurrent requests for assistance from the VJ. 

1230.    The Trial Chamber also heard evidence that smuggling occurred within the VRS’s depots. At the VRS’s 744thLogistics Base, “ l ocal commanders forced their way into the depot in order to take fuel for their own purposes, without obtaining anyone’s authorisation. The local authorities, too, would just simply go there and take fuel for their own needs and then resell it on the market. They would obtain certain funds from this which they then used to bankroll some of their other initiatives and needs”. 

1231.    Overall, the evidentiary record provides no reasonable basis to conclude that a significant quantity of the VRS’s needs in weaponry was fulfilled by smuggling. Rather, the record indicates that smuggling was the work of a relatively limited number of rogue individuals.
(i) Conclusion

1232.    The Defence submits that “the haphazard record system used throughout the RS left clear accounting obstacles to having an accurate estimation of what the VRS had, used and received from any source nigh on impossible”. In its view, “ the Trial Chamber is in effect being asked to speculate concerning the amount of materiel supplied to the VRS by all potential sources and to extrapolate from that, that a substantial amount of the materiel received by the VRS was provided by the VJ”. The Defence argues that “ this invitation to speculate should be rejected as to do so would violate burden of proof the Prosecution must meet at this Tribunal”. 

1233.    The Trial Chamber finds the Defence’s claims unpersuasive. The VRS’s primary sources of supply are not “impossible” to evaluate. The Trial Chamber has meticulously analysed the evidentiary record for other sources of support to the VRS. Such sources indeed existed. The trial record, however, demonstrates that the logistical assistance that the VRS received from the VJ with Vuković’s approval was very important in comparison to other sources. In fact, the record clearly shows that the VRS depended on the VJ’s assistance regardless of its other sources of supply.
10. Conclusions on Logistical and Technical Assistance to the VRS

1234.    The Trial Chamber finds that Borislav Vuković, as Chief of VJ General Staff, oversaw a system providing comprehensive military assistance to the VRS, and participated in the SDC’s decision to license this aid. The VJ General Staff directly supplied considerable quantities of weaponry comprising a very large part of the VRS’s munition requirements.

1235.    In addition, the VJ General Staff played a key role in devising the technical model by which the VRS’s aerial bombs were successfully modified. It further helped the VRS in multiple other areas, such as by providing fuel, technical experts, training, as well as operational support enabling the Pretis factory to produce weaponry.

1236.    The VRS’s general state of dependence on VJ support was acknowledged by Vuković himself, as well as Slobodan Milošević, Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić. 

1237.    Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that important logistical and technical support was provided to the units involved in perpetrating the charged crimes: the Drina Corps, Krajina Corps and SRK. Numerous documents demonstrate that the VJ General Staff gave extensive quantities of weaponry to the Drina Corps. Documents likewise indicate that the Krajina Corps and SRK received logistical assistance. The VJ also helped fulfil the artillery needs of the Eastern Bosnia Corps, which spent “significant quantities of ammunition” while actively engaged in “the zones of responsibility of the 1stand 2ndKrajina Corps and Sarajevo-Romanija Corps”. The VRS’s Koran Depot, which obtained approximately 70% of its ammunition from the VJ, supplied the SRK, Drina Corps and 2ndKrajina Corps. The Pretis factory in RS received significant operational support from the VJ General Staff, which placed technical monitors at Pretis, tested Pretis’ weaponry at the VJ Nikinci facility, and overhauled its artillery casings at the Kragujevac TRZ. Pretis fulfilled part of the SRK, Drina Corps and Krajina Corps’ needs in weaponry. Pretis mostly supplied the VRS’s 3rdSarajevo Brigade. The modified air-bombs that Pretis made were sent to the Koran Depot. Starting in 1995, Pretis’ modified air-bombs were notably delivered to the SRK for usage in Sarajevo. Pretis produced modified air-bombs for the needs of the Drina Corps and the East Bosnia Corps as well. The Trial Chamber recalls its conclusion that the only reasonable inference presented by the evidentiary record is that the modification of air-bombs at Pretis was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić and the VJ General Staff. 
D. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


E. The Defence’s Expert Witness on Logistical Assistance

1264.    The Defence called Ivan Ðokić as an expert witness on the VJ’s logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK. The Defence specifies that it “adopts” the “conclusions” made by Ðokić in his report on the VJ’s logistical assistance. 
1. Ðokić’s Background

1265.    At the time of his testimony, Ðokić was a lecturer at the state university of Novi Pazar, where he taught basic courses in computers and information technology. He is a retired Lieutenant-General of the VJ, and formerly served as the head of the VJ General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration between 1994 and 2000. Ðokić was a subordinate of the Accused and admittedly took part “in the overall process of co-operation with the VRS ” during the war in BiH. 

1266.    The Trial Chamber recalls that Ivan Ðokić played a key role in devising the functional modified air-bomb model, thereby earning Vuković’s praise. In May 1995, Mladić requested that Ðokić specifically be dispatched to assist the VRS with technical problems with its rockets and “modified anti-aircraft defence equipment”, which Vuković approved. The Trial Chamber further recalls its finding that modified air-bombs were used in committing crimes against Sarajevo civilians under Scheduled Incidents A5, A6 and A8, which were part of a broader campaign of attacks against civilians with modified air-bombs. 
2. Questionable Methodology of Expert Report

1267.    Ðokić states in his report that he employed the following methodology: “ c ollection of all available data from the greatest possible number of sources (conversations with participants of events, military and state documentation, reports by international institutions, books, newspaper articles and special reports, legal regulations, etc.)”. On cross-examination, Ðokić admitted that he only used documents given to him by the Defence. 

1268.    The report’s statement of methodology further reads that Ðokić conducted a “selection of data with the highest degree of credibility”. However, Ðokić hardly specifies in his report how he assessed the credibility of information and conflicting estimates. Questioned about this matter, Ðokić stated that it was “too broad of an issue to be explained here, and it is well known how such things are done”, and that he “didn’t think it necessary to include” such information. Ðokić gave an example, however, stating that one “can reject the highest and the lowest data and only use the data from the middle section”. 

1269.    The Trial Chamber considers that Ðokić should have concretely explained in his report his standards for assessing data and why certain data were omitted. The Trial Chamber also finds it questionable to automatically reject the highest or lowest figures for ammunition reserves and deliveries without offering substantive reasons.
3. Use of Anonymous Sources

1270.    The first source of information mentioned in the report’s methodology is “conversations with participants of events”, although Ðokić nowhere provided the identity of these individuals in his report, thereby using them as anonymous sources. Ðokić testified that he did not keep a list of the names of the individuals he spoke to. He neither recorded any of these conversations nor kept “official notes” about what was said. 

1271.    Ðokić stated that these individuals were former JNA officers who served in the VRS, were “familiar with the events” and sometimes “participated in logistics”. Ðokić explained: “I believed it wise to make use of those people who were within the logistical system of the VRS in order to consult with them about what perspired [sic] ”. When asked why he had not made any references or citations to these conversations in his report, Ðokić said that he “did not use a single piece of information” from these conversations because “we should base our research only on documents that are credible and available to all”. This statement contradicted his earlier explanation that he felt it was “wise to make use of those people”. Ðokić stated that he only used these conversations to corroborate his findings: “I used that for my internal work as a control parameter to make sure that I have not made a mistake or omitted something in the course of drafting of the report”. The report does not state where such corroboration was used. Ðokić averred that he discarded all the information from these conversations when he drafted his final report. 

1272.    The Trial Chamber does not find Ðokić’s report reliable in employing anonymous sources as a means of either primary information or corroboration.
4. Claim that Vuković Had Limited Authority Over Logistical Assistance

1273.    Ðokić acknowledged that the FRY provided logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK but argued that the FRY MOD was chiefly responsible for it and that Vuković and the VJ General Staff had limited authority in this regard. Ðokić’s report devotes several pages to the FRY’s domestic laws and procedures and concludes that logistical assistance was overseen by the FRY MOD, “the Central Financial Organ, as foreseen by law and defined by the decisions of the SDC”. Ðokić deemed that, under the FRY Law on Property, the Minister of Defence and his ministry were “the only person or organ directly responsible for lawful, purposeful, and rational use of military equipment in the VJ”. Ðokić insisted that it would have been illegal under the FRY Law on Property for Vuković to send weaponry to the VRS and SVK without the Minister of Defence’s approval. 

1274.    According to Ðokić, it was the SDC and MOD, not Vuković and the VJ General Staff, who decided whether logistical assistance should be given to the VRS and SVK. He claimed that Vuković’s role was essentially limited to proposing certain quantities of aid based on surpluses from VJ reserves following requests from RS and RSK, although Vuković did not make the decision. Ðokić advanced that, once the SDC decided on logistical assistance, the MOD “was chiefly responsible for its coordination”, whereas “ t he VJ was only responsible for the executive part of logistical assistance, which fell within its authority”. The MOD oversaw “international military cooperation” with the VRS and SVK, but Vuković and the VJ General Staff merely handled “product reception, storage, transport, maintenance (including repairs and regular servicing), operational use, and the disposition of materiel”. 

1275.    Ðokić affirmed that the SDC had no plenary power to give Vuković authority over logistical assistance, and that the SDC’s actions violated the FRY’s domestic laws and procedures:







The SDC cannot circumvent any laws or the MOD … because the SDC is not superior to the government. They can’t say the MOD is – has no say in this. Everything stays in power respective [sic] of any SDC decisions. As far as I understand, the SDC may order something to the Chief of Staff but it cannot order anything to the government or the minister of defence. They cannot rule out the legal procedure that is in place. 









It is my belief that the decisions of the SDC were not based on sound procedures for making strategic decisions … I believe that the SDC ordered one of its subordinates to issue certain documents and regulate methods without changing the legal position of the MOD. And the SDC is not empowered to do so because it is clearly prescribed in the law. 





1276.    Ðokić was confronted on cross-examination with the order by President Zoran Lilić, made pursuant to an SDC decision, giving Vuković the authority to supply the VRS and SVK with weaponry and equipment. While Ðokić conceded the validity of the order, he resolutely maintained that it was the MOD, not Vuković, which was responsible for supplying the VRS and the SVK with weaponry. 

1277.    Ðokić did not mention Lilić’s order in his report and explained this omission as follows: “I did not make use of this document because it wasn’t provided to me when I drafted the report”. Again, Ðokić acknowledged that he only relied on documents provided to him by the Defence. Lilić’s order was preceded by the 18th SDC Session, where Vuković urged the SDC to give him the authority to give logistical assistance to the VRS and the SVK or let the Law on Property regulate the matter. Ðokić failed to mention this passage of the 18th SDC Session in his report. 

1278.    Ðokić nonetheless claimed that he analysed “all of the available Stenographic Notes and Minutes” of SDC meetings, including “proposals by General Vuković”. His report quotes from several SDC meetings and recognises that on two occasions Vuković encouraged the SDC to give logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK. However, in addition to the 18th SDC Session, his report omits the 21st Session, where Vuković strongly encouraged the SDC to maintain assistance to the VRS and SVK because they would otherwise lose territories. Vuković then advised the SDC to approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts to the VRS and SVK. Ðokić similarly left out the 37th SDC Session, where Vuković again urged the SDC to keep on authorising VJ assistance to the VRS and SVK. 

1279.    Ðokić’s report quotes from the 23rd SDC Session, which concluded that:







the Federal Government should redistribute funds in the federal and republic budgets in order to secure an additional 35.3 million to finance the adopted measures and the acquisition of materiel and technical equipment needed to boost combat readiness of the VJ . The FRY MOD shall use these funds, and those secured by RS and RSK for their needs, to organise the production and acquisition of materiel and technical equipment. 





Ðokić failed to mention what transpired beforehand, namely that Vuković’s Deputy Chief had given a presentation to the SDC stressing that the VJ’s reserves were partially depleted as a consequence of logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK; and that Vuković convinced the SDC to increase the VJ’s budget so that logistical assistance would continue. 

1280.    The Trial Chamber reiterates its finding that the SDC delegated to Vuković the authority to manage the logistical assistance process, and finds that Ðokić’s claims are incredible. Moreover, Ðokić’s focus on legalistic questions diverts attention from the heart of the matter: the actual role that Vuković played in the logistical assistance process—not what the FRY’s domestic legislation technically stipulated about the respective powers of the SDC, MOD, and Chief of the VJ General Staff.
5. Gross Underestimation of Logistical Assistance from VJ

1281.    At the outset, the Trial Chamber notes that Ðokić provided detailed numerical estimates of the weapon reserves in the SFRY in late 1990 prior to its dissolution, as well as in RS and the other new states in 1992 after the JNA withdrew. Ðokić concluded that the VRS’s ammunition and fuel reserves “had already been exhausted by the beginning of 1993”. 

1282.    With regard to the quantity of logistical assistance from the FRY to the VRS and SVK, Ðokić affirms that “the assistance given from the surplus of the VJ was small in scope during the period 1993-1995, since supplies of the VJ had almost completely stopped due to insufficient budgetary funds, while strategic war reserves did not decrease significantly (part of the reserves were spent on the VJ’s current activities)”. To the contrary, the Trial Chamber recalls the overwhelming evidence that the VJ gave considerable supplies from its reserves to the VRS and SVK, and that Vuković persuaded the SDC to increase the VJ’s budget for this purpose. 

1283.    In particular, Ðokić provided figures positing that VJ assistance only constituted a tiny fraction of the VRS’s “needs” in ammunition, which he described as the quantity of used ammunition. He posited that the maximum level of assistance provided by the VJ comprised 8.11% of the VRS’s small arms ammunition and 12% of artillery ammunition. Ðokić explained how he reached this figure: “It was not an assessment of mine. I added up the figures from all documents indicating any assistance lent. I was not making an assessment; I was doing my math”. Ðokić later conceded that he only added the quantities of ammunition on material lists given to him by the Defence. As for his figure on the VRS’s needs, Ðokić stated that he drew it from a document he cites as “Annual Financial Report of the VRS for 1994”. This document does not appear to be in evidence, unless it is the same document as Ex. P1214, entitled “Annual Account of the Plan of Tasks and Financing of the VRS for 1994”. 

1284.    In any event, Ex. P1214 clearly refutes Ðokić’s position, as its tabulation of ammunition procured in 1994 indicates that the VJ was the VRS’s principal source of infantry ammunition that year, and that it provided approximately a fourth of the VRS’s shells too. Conversely, Ðokić claimed that VJ aid comprised only 6.7% of the VRS’s needs in small arms ammunition in 1994 (193.8 of 2,864 tonnes) and zero percent of its artillery ammunition needs. 

1285.    Ðokić had Ex. P1214 in his possession but did not use it for his numerical estimates. He proffered the following unconvincing excuse for this omission: “this document does not fall within materiel documents. According to the rules of materiel operations in the VJ , materiel documents, receipts, bills of ladings, delivery sheets are all materiel documents which attend materiel transactions”. When Ðokić was again asked why he omitted Ex. P1214, his answer shed more light on his methodology:







Q: Your paragraph 289 is not an accurate determination of the extent of military assistance. What it is, is the results of you adding up materiel lists and delivery slips which you were supplied by the Defence. Is that a fairer characterisation of your findings in paragraph 289? A: That is true. 





1286.    The Trial Chamber further recalls the vast body of evidence showing the VRS’s clear dependency on VJ logistical assistance, which likewise demonstrates that Ðokić’s conclusions are not credible. For instance, amid extensive additional evidence, Mladić’s report to the RS National Assembly provides credible data on the proportion of VRS used ammunition stemming from VJ aid, which was far more important than what Ðokić advanced. Ðokić did not mention Mladić’s figures in his report.

1287.    Finally, Ðokić deemed that “ t he predominant means of supplying the VRS and SVK with ammunition and fuel during the period 1993-1995 was obviously by purchasing it on the market, from the producers, based on commercial agreements. The FRY had no surpluses from which to provide assistance”. The Trial Chamber finds that Ðokić’s conclusion is again belied by the overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Not only could RS scarcely afford to pay for weaponry, but VJ aid by far exceeded the weaponry it purchased from the market. 
6. Conclusion

1288.    For all of these reasons, the Trial Chamber finds that Ivan Ðokić greatly lacks credibility, reliability and impartiality as an expert witness. In particular, Ðokić’s conclusions on the organisation of the logistical assistance process and the quantities of aid delivered carry no evidentiary weight in the Trial Chamber’s opinion.
F. Evidence Recovered from the Alleged Crime Scenes
1. Submissions of the Parties

1289.    The Prosecution contends that weaponry recovered from crime scenes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica stemmed from the logistical assistance overseen by Vuković. It affirms that “crater analyses at the sites of artillery attacks on Sarajevo revealed that the mortar shells involved had been manufactured using components made in Serbia during the Indictment period”. It adds that “exemplars of shell casings recovered from Vlasenica execution sites were found to have been manufactured in Serbia during the Indictment period”. 

1290.    The Defence generally challenges the probative value of this evidence and notably submits that the Prosecution failed to establish a link between Vuković and ammunition retrieved from Vlasenica execution and burial sites. 
2. Shells Recovered from Sarajevo Crime Scenes

1291.    Remnants of shells manufactured by the Krušik factory in Valjevo, Serbia, were recovered in Sarajevo at the crime scenes of Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that these shells were fired by the VRS. 

1292.    The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that the VJ General Staff provided shells from its reserves to the VRS as part of the logistical assistance system managed by Vuković. The VJ’s own weaponry was originally manufactured by the FRY special purpose industries, one of which was Krušik. In this regard, it is possible that the aforesaid Krušik shells fired on Sarajevo civilians were obtained by VRS units from VJ reserves with Vuković’s approval.

1293.    On the other hand, the VRS purchased shells directly from the special purpose industries as well, albeit in smaller quantities. It therefore would also be possible to conclude that the VRS purchased these particular shells directly from Krušik. That transaction would not necessarily have implicated Vuković. While Vuković had a measure of influence over the special purpose industries, the latter were primarily managed by the FRY MOD. In addition, one cannot reasonably discount the possibility that the VRS obtained these particular shells through smuggling or donations of VJ personnel outside the official logistical assistance process. 

1294.    ence, the trial record does not establish that the particular shells used in Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9 were provided to the VRS pursuant to the logistical assistance process managed by Vuković.
3. Bullets Recovered from Vlasenica Crime Scenes

1295.    Witness MP-14 examined two photographs of rifle bullet cartridges recovered from the Vlasenica area, in which he identified two cartridges of 7.62mm bullets manufactured in 1993 and 1994 by the Prvi Partizan factory in U`ice, Serbia, as indicated by engravings on the bullets. MP-14 further examined the photograph of a crate containing ammunition, which was recovered from Orahovac, a killing site in the Vlasenica area. Based on various markings, MP-14 identified the pictured material as 7.62mm bullets manufactured in 1994 by Prvi Partizan. MP-14 testified that the gunpowder for these bullets was manufactured by “Milan Blagojević Lučani” and kept in the “Nikinci depot” in Serbia. 

1296.    The Trial Chamber finds that it is impossible to conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that these specific bullets were provided to the VRS pursuant to the logistical assistance process that Vuković oversaw. Overall, this evidence presents the same problems as the aforementioned shells recovered from Sarajevo. The trial record does not establish whether these specific bullets were delivered to the VRS pursuant to Vuković’s orders, purchased directly from Prvi Partizan or otherwise procured through unauthorised channels.

1297.    The evidence does not establish that Vuković had a hand in the material delivered by the Milan Blagojević facility. With regard to the Nikinci depot, the record does not conclusively indicate whether this was a VJ General Staff or FRY MOD facility. While Radojica Kadijević testified about a facility at Nikinci that was a technical testing centre under VJ General Staff oversight, the record does not demonstrate that it was the same gunpowder storage facility mentioned by MP-14.

1298.    Moreover, the Defence challenges the reliability of findings made by Garry Selsky, a Prosecution investigator who oversaw the examination of 3,644 bullet casings collected at Vlasenica killing sites identified in Schedule D of the Indictment. Upon scrutinising engravings on the bullets, Selsky determined that most of them had been manufactured by Prvi Partizan, including 378 that were manufactured at that factory from 1993 henceforth. 

1299.    Selsky admitted on cross-examination that his language assistant told him where Prvi Partizan was situated—Selsky did not make an independent determination of that fact. Selsky mentioned that his language assistant participated in the counting of bullets as well. Selksy did not concretely explain whether his language assistant helped him make other substantive findings. It is noteworthy, however, that Selsky claimed that the basis for the language assistant’s knowledge was his experience as a soldier in the VJ and his “hobby” of buying and selling firearms for shooting at a firing range. Selsky believed that the assistant had “expertise” on firearms despite the fact that he never vetted him to ascertain the extent of his knowledge. 

1300.    The Defence argues that Selsky’s findings are not reliable due to various problems with his methodology, his alleged lack of knowledge, and his reliance on his language assistant’s “hobby”. The Trial Chamber agrees with the Defence that the language assistant’s “hobby” is not a reliable source of knowledge. However, the Trial Chamber finds that there is no doubt that Prvi Partizan was based in Užice, Serbia; and further notes that MP-14’s testimony confirms that the engraving “PPU” on bullets stands for Prvi Partizan being the manufacturer. Finally, even though Selsky’s testimony was ambiguous at times, the Trial Chamber accepts his basic conclusion that 378 bullet casings out of 3,644 recovered from Vlasenica killing sites were manufactured by Prvi Partizan in 1993 henceforth. 

1301.    In any event, Selsky’s findings concerning Prvi Partizan bullets recovered from the Vlasenica area raise the same problems as discussed above. Again, it is not possible to reasonably conclude that Vuković was involved in the provision of these specific bullets.
4. Conclusion

1302.    For all of these reasons, the Trial Chamber concludes that the evidence does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković was involved in providing the specific shells and bullets recovered from the aforesaid crime scenes.
G. Other Forms of Assistance
1. Drina Plan

1303.    On 8 November 1993, the political and military leadership of the FRY, RS and RSK, including Vuković, Mladić, Novaković, and Slobodan Milošević met in Belgrade. One of the meeting’s conclusions was to start preparing a single war plan involving all three armies (VJ, VRS and SVK). 

1304.    The Main Staffs of the VRS and SVK set up teams to work on the plan. Novaković testified that the part of the plan related to the role of the SVK was drafted in Knin, while the harmonisation of the final version, which also included the assessments of the role of the VRS and the VJ, was done at the premises of the General Staff of the VJ. 

1305.    The final version of the war plan took the form of a directive, which was “the highest-level commanding document at the highest strategic level”. The “top people” of the VJ General Staff were therefore involved, as well as Novaković (SVK), Milovanović (VRS) and their own selected teams. A directive generally stressed the purpose of an operation, the general tasks and provided an indication of how the task should be executed. Its implementation therefore required the subsequent adoption of detailed plans by the lower levels of the army, in accordance with the directive. 

1306.    The war plan was finalised on 14 November 1993 and was signed by the President of the SDC, Zoran Lilić. It was formally known as the “Directive for Use of the Yugoslav Army, the Republika Srpska Army, and the Serb Army of Krajina”, and was commonly referred to as the “Drina Plan”. It provided for the creation of a single Serbian State, and described the main tasks of the VJ, VRS and SVK in the event of foreign aggression. It envisaged all three armies having a common war objective, military doctrine and military strategy. Its general objective was to:







Defend the territorial integrity of the Serbian states west of the Drina and Danube rivers and the FRY, protect Serbian people from genocide, liberate parts of Serbian territories with Serbian majorities, create conditions for the establishment of a single state of the Serbian people, prevent creation of Greater Croatia and a compact Islamic state on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. 





1307.    According to Novaković, the Drina Plan was very important for the survival of the SVK, as it established that the VRS and the VJ would assist the SVK in protecting the territory of the RSK in case of an attack by the HVO. 

1308.    Each of the three armies needed to implement the Drina Plan at their level and this required integrating the forces of the other armies into their respective war plans. The implementation procedure required the Main Staffs of the VRS and SVK, as well as the General Staff of the VJ, to elaborate their own war plan in accordance with the instructions contained in the Drina Plan. These plans contained specific tasks for lower units. 

1309.    The Prosecution argues that although there is no evidence that the Drina Plan was acted upon, its existence shows that the VJ, VRS and SVK intended to act together in defence of unified Serb interests. The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to prove that one of the objectives of the Drina Plan was the creation of a single state of the Serbian people. On the contrary, the evidence shows that Milošević distanced himself from the idea of a single Serbian state. Furthermore, the Defence also points to the testimony of Simić, according to whom the plan “had an objective to represent a strategic masking, primarily directed to potential enemies in order to make a diversion”. 

1310.    The Trial Chamber notes that Simić, head of the First Administration of the VJ, who directly participated in the drafting of the Drina Plan, came to the conclusion that the plan was a “strategic camouflage” and that subsequent work on the plan was “interrupted suddenly”. He also stated that “only the SDC and possibly the Chief of VJ General Staff” were privy to the real intentions of this plan. According to Simić, the Drina Plan never became operative within the VJ. 

1311.    The Trial Chamber notes that several documents show that the Drina Plan was implemented at the VRS Main Staff and VRS Corps level. The Trial Chamber also heard the testimony of Mile Novaković, who testified that the Drina Plan was incorporated into the war plan of the SVK Main Staff, though it was never carried out in its entirety either by the VJ or the SVK. In particular, he testified that the plan was never implemented at the level of the Corps and below. 

1312.    The Trial Chamber finds that regardless of the true nature of the Drina Plan, the evidence shows that Vuković participated in the preparation and approval of this plan together with other military and political leaders of the FRY, RS and SVK. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that while the plan was not implemented in the VJ, some actions were taken at the Main Staff level in the VRS and SVK, and to some degree at the VRS Corps level, to implement it. 
2. Gvozd Plan

1313.    During a meeting in January 1995, attended by Karadžić, Mladić, Vuković, Martić, Čeleketić and Bjelanović, it was agreed that Čeleketić should prepare a new plan for the defence of the RSK. According to this plan, code named “Gvozd”, the VJ and VRS were instructed to provide military assistance to the SVK “to respond to an aggression of the Croatian army should it occur”. The Gvozd Plan was prepared by the SVK in a period of ten days with the assistance of three VJ General Staff colonels, who were provided by Vuković at Čeleketić’s request. It took the form of a directive, formally known as the “Directive for Use of the Serbian Army of Krajina”. Each army was required to implement the Gvozd Plan at its level. 

1314.    Miodrag Simić testified that he had never heard of the Gvozd Plan. However, MP-80 testified that the Gvozd Plan replaced the Drina Plan, insofar as it concerned the SVK. According to MP-80, Slobodan Milošević “approved” the Gvozd Plan and promised to fully support the SVK by providing personnel and logistical assistance. To this end, Milošević instructed Vuković to transport ammunition to the SVK. Although Vuković was reluctant to execute this order because of his concern that the quantities requested would reduce the combat readiness of the VJ, approximately 60 trailer trucks of goods and ammunition from the FRY were delivered to SVK warehouses. 

1315.    According to MP-80, the Gvozd Plan provided the SVK with the assurance that the VJ, as well as Milošević, would not allow an attack against the RSK. The Trial Chamber notes that the VJ and/or VRS did not engage in two military operations of the Croatian Army against the RSK in 1995 – Operation Flash in May and Operation Storm in August. 

1316.    The Prosecution argues that developing the Gvozd Plan was an important task for Vuković and that he provided VJ General Staff officers who were specialists in drafting war plans to assist the SVK in preparing the Gvozd Plan. The Defence argues that Miodrag Simić’s testimony directly contradicts MP-80’s position that members of the VJ General Staff participated in the development of the Gvozd Plan. The Defence further submits that the Gvozd Plan was not formed in accordance with valid military procedures, nor was it accepted and implemented by all of the parties involved. 

1317.    The Trial Chamber finds that although Simić may not have been aware of the existence of the Gvozd Plan, the directive prepared by the SVK shows that the plan indeed existed. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that MP-80 is therefore credible when he testified that the plan existed. The Trial Chamber also notes that there is no evidence that the VJ First Administration was ever involved in the preparation of the plan, which explains why Simić may not have been aware of it.

1318.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied, based on the testimony of MP-80, that Vuković provided VJ General Staff officers to assist in creating the plan. The Trial Chamber further finds that following Milošević’s orders, Vuković provided additional logistical assistance to support the SVK in accordance with the Gvozd Plan. 
3. VJ Members Deployed to the RS

1319.    The Indictment alleges that the Accused aided and abetted the crimes described in Counts 1 to 4, inter alia, by “sending regular VJ troops stationed in the FRY into BiH”. In particular, it alleges that VJ units participated in a military operation known as Pancir-2 that occurred in Vogošća in late 1993 and early 1994. 
(a) Operation Pancir-2

1320.    On 11 November 1993, the VRS Supreme Command issued Operational Directive No. 6 (“Directive 6”) delineating, inter alia, the tasks of the VRS, including orders for the SRK “to prevent the deblockade of Sarajevo and the occupation of the Vogošća, Rajlovac and Had`ići industrial complexes” by the ABiH. 

1321.    Two excerpts from Mladić’s diary show that the capture of Mount Žuć, in the Vogošća area, was discussed in Belgrade at meetings held on 13 and 14 December 1993 between the FRY and RS military and civilian leadership. Amongst the participants were Milošević, Vuković, Karad`ić and Mladić. 

1322.    At the meeting of 13 December 1993, Karad`ić recalled to the participants the VRS six strategic objectives, including the partition of Sarajevo. In this context he stated that the VRS needed to capture some elevation points and that Mount Žuć was particularly important to protect military factories in the area from the ABIH so that they continue their work uninterrupted. The next day Vuković was recorded as stating that reinforcements of about “a hundred professionals” “equipped for combat” would be at the disposal of the VRS by 20 December 1993. The discussion recorded in the diary shows that Mladić expected to receive those reinforcements from the VJ, as well as additional support from the Serbian MUP, by 18 December 1993, and intended to be ready for the operation by 19 December 1993. 

1323.    On 14 December 1993, as a result of talks on that day and based on the decision reached “by the highest officials of the Serbian people”, Mladić issued a “Supplement” to Directive 6 addressed specifically to the SRK Commander, Stanislav Galić. The Supplement sets out the aim and plan of operation Pancir-2, according to which the SRK and its reinforcements were to prevent







an enemy breakthrough towards Sarajevo from the direction of central Bosnia and Gora`de. One part of the forces are [sic] to carry out active combat on a smaller scale in the areas of Mt. Trebević, Mojmilo, Vojkovići, and Ilid`a in order to engage the enemy forces, while /another/ part of the forces … are [sic] to carry out an attack along the Vogošća-Žuć-Pofalići and Lukavica- Hrasnica axes with the following tasks: to break up Muslim forces along axes of the attack … and inflict on them as many losses as possible, and to take over control of the Žuć, Orlić, and Hum facilities, and Mojmilo, if possible, and so create conditions for the uninterrupted work of the ‘Famos’, ‘Orao’, and ‘Pretis’ factories; to cut off Muslim communication from Sarajevo towards Mt. Igman and central Bosnia, and to provide conditions for the division of Sarajevo in two parts. 





The Supplement also stipulates that 120 men of the VJ “Special Forces” should be re- subordinated to the SRK Command in Vogošća on 18 December 1993 and be ready to attack on 19 December 1993. 

1324.    On 15 December 1993, the SRK Command issued an order to the commanders of all the brigades in execution of the Supplement. 
(i) VJ Special Units Corps Deployment

1325.    MP-11 testified that a few days before 16 December 1993, Vuković visited the VJ 72ndSpecial Brigade HQ in Mount Avala accompanied by the brigade’s commander, Colonel Stupar. During the briefing, Vuković ordered members of the 72ndSpecial Brigade’s military police battalion for special operations to go to Sarajevo to participate in an offensive against the ABiH “for” the SRK, aimed at gaining control of Mount Žuć. Vuković stated that Mount Žuć “was a strategic location and it needed to be controlled by Serb forces”. 

1326.    The military police battalion departed from Mount Avala on 16 December 1993. They were joined along the way by members of other VJ SUC units - the Guards Brigade from Belgrade, who had been ordered to deploy from Belgrade the same day, the Armoured Brigade and the 63rdParachute Brigade. They all arrived in the area of Vogošća on 17 December 1993. The following day, General Galić briefed them on the forthcoming mission and on the strategic importance of gaining control of Mount Žuć. 

1327.    Defence witness Zlatko Danilović, who at the time was a member of the military police battalion in Avala, testified that he never saw Vuković at Mount Avala in that period, nor did he hear from other colleagues that Vuković had been there. In addition, the witness stated that he did not know where they were being deployed, and realised that the action would take place in BiH only when the convoy arrived at the barracks in Han Pijesak. The Trial Chamber finds that Danilović’s statement alone is not sufficient to raise a reasonable doubt as to the presence of Vuković at Mount Avala. The Trial Chamber notes that Danilović may not have been present at Mount Avala when Vuković was there. As stated by both MP-11 and Danilović, in December 1995, the military battalion was engaged in a parachute training in Niš. MP-11, however, returned to Mount Avala before the rest of the battalion. Danilović, instead, returned with the rest of the battalion just before they were deployed in the field. In the Trial Chamber’s view, this could explain why MP-11 was present when Vuković and Stupar gave the order whereas Danilović did not see Vuković or hear of his presence. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber finds Danilović’s testimony to be generally of low credibility and attaches limited weight to it. The Trial Chamber notes for example that Danilović stated that once in Vogošća, it was the civilians who lived in the area that showed the witness’s battalion Mount Žuć and told them “what their mission would involve”. Danilović stands alone on this issue and is contradicted not only by the testimony of MP-11 but also by the documentary evidence discussed in this section. 

1328.    The Defence argues that the purpose of seizing Mount Žuć was “so that the ABiH would not disturb the Serbian people on the other side of the mountain”. In support of this argument, it cites the testimony of MP-11 and Danilović. In reviewing their testimony, the Trial Chamber notes that MP-11 stated that this goal was desired, however, he also added that it was a crucial point to control the area and connect the VRS forces on that side of Sarajevo. As for Danilović’s testimony cited by the Defence, the Trial Chamber notes that it refers to his assertion that it was the civilian local population who directed the VJ members in this operation. The Trial Chamber finds that this testimony does not support the Defence argument and also notes that the Defence misrepresented Daniliović’s testimony. In any event, the Trial Chamber has already concluded that it does not find this part of his testimony credible.
(ii) Mount Žuć – 27 December 1993

1329.    For about ten days after their arrival in Vogošća, the members of the 72ndSpecial Brigade engaged only in a few reconnaissance missions. The attack on Mount Žuć was eventually carried out during the early hours of 27 December 1993, under the command of Stupar. The operation was not successful and the 72nd Special Brigade suffered significant losses, with nine soldiers killed and several injured. The injured were immediately transferred either to the Bla`uj hospital in Rajlovac and then to the Military Medical Academy Hospital (“VMA”) in Belgrade, or directly to the VMA by VJ helicopter. 

1330.    Part of the 72ndSpecial Brigade departed from Vogošća soon after the operation, whereas those members that were responsible for the technical equipment remained there for some time longer. 
(iii) Aftermath

1331.    On 30 December 1993, upon an oral order of Stojimirović – Commander of the Guards Brigade – additional members of the Guards Brigade (about 120 to 130 men) were deployed to Vogošća with the task of assisting the pull-out of the 72ndBrigade from the area. By 5 January 1994, the Guards Brigade took over the area of responsibility of the 72ndSpecial Brigade, thereby entering the reserve formation of the SRK. 

1332.    There is evidence that the Guards Brigade was ordered to take part in military actions in the area. For example, according to one entry in the war diary of the Guards Brigade dated 9 January 1994, the Guards Brigade was to “ carry out combat tasks with the unit on orders of the commander of Brigade’s BG-1 combat group ”. Another entry of the war diary reads as follows:







Order for action 18 January 1994. With one BG from the vVPSpN Military Police Special Purposes Platoon and a squad from the bVP Military Police Battalion , in coordinated action with the forces of the Vogošća Brigade, launch an attack along the axis of k./elevation/ 830 – k850, thereby acting in coordination with BG-2 on the Perivoj – Vis axis and facilitating the BG-2 attack. 





A briefing report by Stojimirović states that a certain number of Guards Brigade forces could be “engaged along the direction of the main impact within the formation of the BG-2 … or BG-3 … ”. A report sent from Colonel Petković – the Chief of Staff of the VJ Special Units Corps (“SUC”) – to the SUC Commander suggests a rotation of units, due to the “increased engagement” of the Guards Brigades, “especially in nocturnal activities”. 

1333.    Both Borivoje Tešić – operations officer of the Guards Brigade – and MP-418 stated, however, that the Guards Brigade did not engage in combat activities but rather limited its activity to retrieving the bodies of the 72ndSpecial Brigade soldiers who had been killed on 27 December 1993 and to maintaining, as far as possible, the defence line held by the Vogošća Brigade of the VRS. Tešić estimated that the total number of Guards Brigade present in Vogošća was not substantial compared to the VRS forces present in the field. Tešić further stated that, although the Guards Brigade’s war diary referenced to the planning of combat operations, these were not carried out. 

1334.    Tešić and MP-418 also denied that the Guards Brigade and the SRK cooperated or acted in coordination. Several documents nonetheless contradict their testimony: the abovementioned briefing report by Colonel Stojimirović states that, upon arrival in Vogošća, the Guards Brigade entered the reserve formation of the SRK pursuant to an order from the SRK Commander; a communication from the SUC command to Colonel Perković shows that the SUC and the SRK coordinated in the planning of the pullout from combat; finally, the VRS warned against the use in communications of the term “Yugoslav Army” and stated that VJ units would be treated as reserve forces of the VRS. Moreover, Tešić himself conceded that, in relation to operations which did not entail engagement in active combat, the superior officers of the Guards Brigade could receive orders from the SRK commander. He also testified that, between 15 and 17 January 1994, officers of the Military Police Special Purposes Platoon, a unit of the Guards Brigade, provided training to the snipers of the Rajlovac and the Ilid`a Brigades, units of the SRK. 

1335.    The Trial Chamber notes that Tešić stated that one of the reasons the Guards Brigade was deployed, was to “stabilise the part of the defence line held by the Vogošća Brigade of the VRS”. During re-examination he explained that the Guards Brigade was not engaged in active combat, but rather that there were instances when it had to destroy emerging targets at the front line or respond to fire with fire. He added that save for one intervention in the area of Srednje with a couple of vehicles and a group of 20 men the Guards Brigade did not participate in active action. The Trial Chamber finds that this amounts to active engagement and that Tešić was attempting to downplay the role of the Guards Brigade.

1336.    Having carefully considered the testimony of Tešić and MP-418 in light of the documentary evidence described above, and their demeanour in court when discussing the engagement of the Guards Brigade and/or their cooperation with the VRS, the Trial Chamber finds that their testimony is not credible when they claimed that the Guards Brigade did not engage in combat activities and that there was no coordination or cooperation with the SRK.
(b) Secrecy of VJ Presence in the Area

1337.    According to the Prosecution, the VJ needed to conceal its presence around Sarajevo, as the FRY was under international sanctions for its involvement in the war in BiH and Croatia and it could “ill afford” to be discovered. The Defence claims that the VJ presence in BiH was not and could not be hidden, and that the VJ deployment was even reported on Sarajevo television. 

1338.    In support on its claim, the Defence cites the testimony of Tešić, MP-418 and MP-11. Having reviewed their testimony, the Trial Chamber notes that Tešić testified that as far as his unit was concerned, they did not “hide from anyone” and that in any event it was difficult to hide their presence in the area. MP-418 added that he had heard rumours that a Sarajevo television reported that a unit from the VJ had allegedly arrived in the area. Finally, MP-11 admitted that the VJ involvement was supposed to be secret, but that members of his unit suspected that this information reached the ABiH. 

1339.    At the same time, the Trial Chamber has been presented with evidence clearly showing that both the VJ and VRS tried to keep the presence of the VJ in the Vogošća area and the involvement of VJ troops in the attack on Mount Žuć secret. On 25 December 1993, General Milovanović issued a warning forbidding the “use of or any reference in the regular and telephone communications to the term Yugoslav Army units”. One of the witnesses stated that the 72ndSpecial Brigade was aware of this warning and added that “every time they were engaged in Bosnia, they were supposed to act under the Republika Srpska”. Furthermore, members of the VJ forces deployed to Vogošća were instructed to remove their VJ insignia and leave behind their wallets and identification documents before arriving at their destination. 

1340.    Additional support for the intended secret character of the VJ mission in BiH can be found in the official medical certificate issued by the VJ to a Guards Brigade soldier who was wounded while in Vogošća and later transferred by helicopter to the VMA in Belgrade. The certificate, issued by the Guards Brigade Commander, stated that he had been wounded “while carrying out combat activities, i.e. securing the FRY state border”. No mention was made of his engagement in Vogošća. Similarly, the obituaries of one of the 72ndBrigade soldiers killed in this operation, Goran Galjak, read that he died heroically “on 27 December 1993, defending his country, the Greater Serbia” with no mention as to where he was killed. His death certificate likewise states that he was killed while participating in a “national defence operation”. The death certificate of another soldier who participated in the Pancir-2 Operation, Mladen Stjepanović, records his place of death on 27 December 1993 as Belgrade. 

1341.    The Trial Chamber recalls in this context that the FRY was under international sanctions imposed pursuant to Chapter VII of the UN Charter and that the UNSC repeatedly condemned the FRY’s failure to cease any form of interference in the events unfolding in BiH. Sacirbey testified that the goal of these sanctions was to have the FRY put a halt to all actions that continued to “fuel the conflict”, including sending troops to BiH. 

1342.    Against this backdrop, the Trial Chamber finds that, whether or not the VJ was successful in hiding its presence in the area, the evidence described above clearly shows that both the VJ and the VRS intended and strived to keep the VJ involvement in Vogošća secret.
(c) Vuković’s Presence in the Area

1343.    The evidence shows that Vuković was present in Vogošća on 8 January 1994. He participated in a meeting held at the Park Hotel between several RS politicians and VRS and VJ military commanders, including Mladić, Krsmanović, Galić, Rajko Koprivica, Ratko Had`ić, Mirko Krajišnik and Panić (the commander of the VJ Special Units Corps). There is no evidence of what was discussed during the meeting. However, according to a witness, it probably concerned a situation within the area of responsibility of the SRK. 
(d) SDC 18thSession of 7 February 1994

1344.    During the SDC session held on 7 February 1994, the deployment of VJ units in BiH was discussed and Vuković stated that those men went in the area voluntarily, in the absence of an SDC decision authorising the use of VJ forces abroad. Momir Bulatović, however, disputed this statement and added that they did not even know where they were going. Vuković responded that“ had they known where they were going, they probably wouldn’t have gone!” 

1345.    The Trial Chamber does not believe that the VJ soldiers taking part in the Pancir-2 Operation were volunteers. The Trial Chamber notes that Vuković refers to the voluntary nature of the engagement to justify the deployment in the absence of an SDC decision. Yet, Vuković himself seems to concede that the men were not really volunteers when he said that “had they known where they were going they would not have gone”. In a subsequent statement made in 1996 at the 58thSession of the SDC, Vuković also recalled that “we engaged a unit to regain Žuć. … We lost eight men … ”. 

1346.    The voluntary engagement of the soldiers is further undermined by the evidence showing that both the VJ’s 72ndSpecial Brigade and the Guards Brigades were ordered to deploy to the area. In addition, MP-418 expressly stated that he and his colleagues did not volunteer to go to BiH. 
4. Other Instances of Direct Involvement of the VJ in BiH

1347.    The Trial Chamber has been presented with some evidence pertaining to the plans of further use of the VJ units in BiH. According to MP-11, in 1994 plans were formulated to involve the 72ndBrigade in Vlasenica, in coordination with VRS units, in order to boost morale of other units taking part in combat there. MP-11 testified that on several occasions Vuković visited the military police battalion for special operations of the 72ndSpecial Brigade to discuss such potential engagement. Nonetheless, the battalion was never deployed to Vlasenica in 1994. The same witness heard, however, that members of the 72ndBrigade were deployed in the area of Vlasenica in 1995. However, this evidence remains uncorroborated hearsay and is not sufficient to convince the Trial Chamber.

1348.    On 13 May 1995, Vuković issued an order establishing that the 72ndSpecial Brigade and 63rdParachute Brigade, units of the SUC, should be ready for engagement in the Baranja region (Croatia) at the request of the SVK 11th Corps Commander and with Vuković’s approval. 

1349.    Vuković addressed a telegram to Mladić on 23 June 1995, referring to the following assistance:







One battalion of volunteers with about 400 men led by Colonel TRKULJA – checked for contact with you. The Battalion is armed and battle ready.









One battalion of about 200 men is being prepared, to come to you next week, around Kušić.









We are sending volunteers the same as we have done so far.









An air group (three Kraguj aircraft) will relocate from Skelani to Sokolac, about 10 men (provide them with a ready runway, one truckload of fuel and accommodation). They are coming on Tuesday. 





Siniša Borović, who at the time was Vuković’s Chef de Cabinet and who forwarded the telegram to the VRS Main Staff, testified that he was not aware whether the battalion under the command of Trkulja was in fact dispatched from the VJ. However, he stated that had the battalion been sent to the VRS, his office would have received confirmation from the VRS Main Staff. In the absence of any such evidence, the Trial Chamber cannot make any finding as to whether these men were sent to the VRS.

1350.    Later that year, in September, Vuković suggested to have an urgent SDC meeting to discuss the RS request for the deployment of 3 to 5 VJ brigades to stabilise the front in Northwest Bosnia. 

1351.    According to Charles Kirudja’s confidential sources, in 1995, around 300-400 members of the VJ 63rdParatroops Command Brigade from Niš joined the VRS forces at the battle on Mt. Majevica near Bijeljina to help them defend a communication tower. 
5. Assistance in Communications and Electronic Data Transmissions

1352.    The Prosecution submits that the VJ assisted the VRS by permitting use of their communication centres and nodes located in Serbia and Montenegro, and by providing equipment and technical expertise. The Defence contends that VRS was responsible for the operation of its own communications. It acknowledges that the VRS utilised FRY communication hubs but challenges any inference that such use was expressly permitted by the VJ or by Vuković. 

1353.    Milenko Jevđević, who served as the Signals Battalion Commander of the VRS Drina Corps, acknowledged that the VJ provided the VRS with access to “connecting pathways and the available capacities of its communication channels at FRY stationary communications hubs”. Similarly, Drago Čovilo, who served as the Chief of the Department for Operations and Staff Affairs in the Sector for Communications, Information Technology and Electronic Warfare within the VJ General Staff from 1993 to 1999, testified that while at no point in time “access or entry to the VJ communications system was allowed”, communication hubs would be “used as an intermediary radio relay station to ensure communication that went further”. The communication hubs used by the VRS Drina Corps were the Cer and Crni Vrh stations in Serbia and the Stražbenica station in Montenegro. 

1354.    The Trial Chamber notes that Jevđević testified that messages transmitted via these channels were subject to encryption, and only decrypted at the final destination. According to the witness, the VJ did not have the code books used by individual VRS units to decode messages sent to them. 

1355.    Jevđević also testified that for the Krivaja 95 operation (Vlasenica), he used specific technical equipment to encrypt written communications between the forward command post and the Drina Corps command, as well as with subordinate VRS units. Oral non-encrypted communications among the various VRS units, e.g. between the Zvornik Brigade and the Bratunac Brigade, went through the FRY stationary communication hubs, and took place on a ”regular military communication line”. 

1356.    One witness testified that unlike the communications system, the radar system and the anti- aircraft defence system of the VRS could operate independently of the VJ. However, according to him, it was logical that each system was better off when it was backed up by, and acted in coordination with, the other system. At the same time, the witness was shown a document approved by Ratko Mladić which provided instructions for coordination between the air forces and/or the anti-aircraft defences of the VRS, VJ and SVK. The witness testified that he never saw any order or decision implementing these instructions. 

1357.    The Defence points out numerous requests by the VRS to the VJ for other communications assistance which were unfulfilled. Although the Trial Chamber does not contest that some of the requests were not met by the VJ, the record contains evidence showing that at times the VJ General Staff did, in fact, provide assistance to the SVK and the VRS in other areas of communication, including by providing: communications equipment, “jamming capabilities”, and repairs and maintenance of existing equipment. 

1358.    Based on the above evidence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the VRS used communication hubs present in the FRY territory with the consent of the VJ and that Vuković provided communication equipments and technical expertise to the VRS.
H. Vuković’s Relationship with Mladić
1. Personal Relationship between Vuković and Mladić

1359.    During his suspect interview, Vuković stated that before he became the Chief of the VJ General Staff he had only seen General Ratko Mladić three times. Vuković also asserted that, once he became the Chief of the VJ General Staff, Mladić maintained “a certain distance” from him “because he knew very well that I was against any illicit actions”. According to Vuković, this was because “ the entire leadership of Republika Sprska knew that I was against any destruction of buildings, against any … use of force against the civilian population and so on”. He further claimed that “we did not talk all that much, so I could not really tell if he was lying to me or deceiving me … and we were not close enough for me to detect such a character trait”. 

1360.    Vuković also discussed his relationship with Mladić in Vreme, a Belgrade weekly newspaper, in a statement published on 2 January 1995. Vuković stated that “Mladić and I are acquaintances and war comrades. Our relationship is utterly normal, that is a relationship of two professional officers who are fighting against the physical extermination of their people”. 

1361.    General Ðorñe Ćurčin, the former Chief of Operations and Training of the VJ 1stArmy from 1993 to 1998, testified that Vuković, Mladić and Ćurčin were in the same group in the National Defence School and ever since had known each other as colleagues. Ćurčin described himself as a “personal or family friend … ” of General Ratko Mladić, whom he had known for 32 years, and a “pal” of Borislav Vuković. During his testimony, Ćurčin would not describe the extent of Vuković’s relationship with Mladić because he lacked “firsthand” knowledge, but, in his previous witness interview, characterised them as “mates and close friends”. 

1362.    Nikola Tošović, General Mladić’s cousin and the Chief of Technical Services in Logistics in the Vogošća Brigade, referred to Vuković and Mladić as only “acquaintances”. 
2. Vuković’s Support for Mladić’s Selection as Commander of the VRS Main Staff

1363.    The Trial Chamber reviewed an excerpt from General Ratko Mladić’s notebook that described a meeting held in Nevisinje, East Herzegovina, on 11 May 1992. According to the excerpt, the meeting was attended by Mladić, Vuković, Vukan Bratić, the President of the Nevesinje Municipality, and other military and political leaders from the region. The excerpt attributed the following comments to Vuković during the meeting: “Ninković and I undertook an initiative with Karadžić to come here . He Mladić showed with his own example what a JNA officer should be like. You have the right person, if you support him, you will get what you want”. 

1364.    On 12 May 1992, Mladić, who was then a Lieutenant-General, was appointed Commander of the VRS Main Staff by the Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH. 
3. Peace Plans

1365.    The evidence shows that Vuković and Milošević attempted several times to convince Mladić to accept the peace plan. For example, on 12 August 1994, Vuković travelled to the VRS command post to meet with Mladić. On that occasion, he conveyed a message from Slobodan Milošević, asking Mladić to reject the RS leadership and accept the Contact Group Plan. According to an excerpt from Mladić’s diary, Vuković urged the acceptance of a peace plan by stating that Milošević was “asking that you Mladić make a major turnabout in terms of politics so that the plan is accepted”. This proposal was refused. 

1366.    On 20 September 1994, Vuković participated in another meeting during which the FRY leadership attempted to convince Mladić to stop the war and accept a peace plan. According to Mladić’s diary, members of the FRY SDC attempted to persuade him to reject the RS leadership because it had refused to accept a peace plan. The efforts of the members of the FRY were unsuccessful in this instance. 

1367.    During the SDC session of 2 November 1994, both Vuković and Milošević expressed their frustration that the RS leadership had refused to accept the Contact Group Plan. Vuković stated that Mladić’s goals with respect to the resolution of the conflict were “unrealistic” and that as a result, his previous attempts to “persuade” Mladić were unsuccessful. He stated that that “I went there on behalf of both presidents in order to persuade them subsequently about the pure military facts, but to no avail”. Vuković further stated that members of the RS leadership, including Mladić, could not be persuaded to accept the peace plan and that Mladić “has been manipulated by his politics and that is how he behaves”. President Milošević referred to the Bosnian Serbs’ decision to reject the Contact Group Plan “as a disastrous mistake”. In response to General Vuković’s recommendation that “we should invite our men from Bosnia and try to persuade them to accept the plan … ”, Milošević stated that “the Army the VJ is the sole factor that has influence on them and you know very well that you cannot do anything there”. Vuković then stated that “at least we can invite them, and we can try to persuade those people in front of this audience”. Then, Milošević, with the agreement of Lilić and Momir Bulatović, specifically recommended that Vuković should contact Mladić “so we can talk to him once more”. 

1368.    The evidence shows that another attempt to persuade Mladić to accept a peace plan was made by FRY leadership, particularly by Milošević, during the SDC session of 24 January 1995. 

1369.    In addition, at the 42ndSession of the FRY SDC, held on 23 August 1995, members of the SDC attempted again to persuade Mladić to abandon the current RS leadership and support the international peace process. According to the SDC minutes, Vuković was present at this meeting and participated in the efforts to persuade Mladić. Mladić, however, repeatedly refused the requests of the FRY to forsake the RS leadership and to endorse a peace plan. For instance, the SDC minutes state that “having listened to the arguments tendered by President Milošević, President Bulatović, President Lilić, and General Vuković, General Ratko Mladić persisted with his proposal”. Moreover, Vuković also attempted to persuade Mladić to support the peace process by warning him of the “impending danger of Croatian aggression against Prevlaka and Eastern Slovonia”. The evidence demonstrates that any attempts made by Vuković and the FRY leadership to persuade Mladić at this meeting were unsuccessful. 
4. Release of French Humanitarian Workers

1370.     On 4 March 1995, the VRS detained four French nationals from the Pharmaciens Sans Frontieres humanitarian organisation. On 12 April 1995, a French military representative sent a letter to Vuković expressing the notion that even though the VRS agents who were holding the French humanitarian workers were not technically subordinate to the VJ General Staff, the representative hoped that Vuković would nonetheless use his influence to help bring about their
release. 

1371.      According to Dragan Vukšić, the Chief of the VJ Administration for relations with foreign armies and missions within the VJ from 1993 to 1997, Vuković played a “particularly significant and delicate role” in discussions with Mladić in order to obtain the release of the hostages and that “neither General Vuković nor I were ever in a position to tell General Mladić or anyone else that they had done something wrong”.Dragan Vukšić, Nevertheless, Vukšić confirmed that “Vuković took steps” to ensure
that the four Frenchmen were ultimately released. 
5. UNPROFOR Hostages

1372.      On 26 and 27 May 1995, in response to the NATO forces’ air strikes on Pale earlier that day, the VRS took approximately 400 UNPROFOR personnel as hostages and used some as human shields to deter further air strikes. Some hostages were later distributed across Bosnian Serb
territory to protect potential targets. 

1373.      By 9 June 1995, between 105 and 146 UNPROFOR hostages still had not been released. Charles Kirudja, the Delegate of the Special Representative of the UN Secretary-General in Belgrade, testified that he met with Jovica Stanišić, President Milošević’s Special Envoy, who travelled to Bosnia to meet with Mladić in order to obtain the release of the UNPROFOR hostages. 

1374.      Kirudja confirmed that Stanišić and those who were conducting the operation “were under instructions from both President Milošević and General Vuković to do their utmost to obtain the release of those additional three on a day that was also rainy with poor flight conditions”. According to Kirudja, Stanišić “undertook to pressure Mladić to deblock the UN group and simply let them go to their units”. The crisis ended when Mladić sent the remaining hostages by bus to
Niš, where they were released to UNPROFOR. 
6. Meeting between Vuković and Mladić in Bosnia on 18 July 1995

1375.      The Trial Chamber heard the testimony of Ned Krayishnik, a Canadian Serb who along with Milan Lešić and others established the Republika Sprska Humanitarian Organisation (“Organisation”) in Hamilton, Ontario, Canada, in 1992. Between 1992 and 1996, Krayishnik and other members of the Organisation made five or six trips to the former Yugoslavia to provide humanitarian aid to the Bosnian Serbs. 

1376.      On 14 July 1995, Krayishnik, along with other members of the Organisation, travelled to Serbia and RS to deliver money to RS and, upon the request of General Mladić, a medical scanner to the Military Academy Hospital in Belgrade. On 17 July 1995, the Organisation’s delegation travelled to Han Pijesak in the BiH, where the VRS headquarters was located, approximately 27 kilometres from Vlasenica, in order to meet Mladić and receive his appreciation for their donations. During the meeting, Mladić congratulated himself on the “liberation of Vlasenica” and for “solv ing our problems with Vlasenica”. He stated that he hoped that “in the course of the next day that Žepa would be solved in the same way as the area of Vlasenica”."> 

1377.      On 18 July 1995, the delegation arrived at a picnic area at Crna Rijeka, where Generals
Vuković, Mladić and Gvero were waiting to meet them. The group met for a couple of hours. 

Krayishnik stated that Mladić and Gvero discussed the liberation of Vlasenica in the presence of Vuković and that there was “a lot of joking around at lunch” and no signs of disagreement among the generals. 
7. Release of the French Pilots by the VRS

1378.      On 30 August 1995, Frederic Chiffot and Jose Souvignet, the French crew of a NATO Mirage 2000 aircraft (“French pilots”), were captured by the VRS after their aircraft was shot down
over Pale by the VRS’s anti-aircraft defence system. In the following months, Vuković organised a series of meetings between international representatives and Mladić and others in RS to obtain the release of the French pilots. 

1379.      The first meeting, which occurred while NATO temporarily halted air-strikes against Bosnian Serb military targets around Sarajevo, was between UNPROFOR Commander General Bernard Janvier and Mladić in Zvornik on 1 September 1995. The Trial Chamber was presented with testimony that Vuković helped to broker this meeting."> The Trial Chamber also reviewed an excerpt from Mladić’s diary, which described a meeting between Mladić and General Bertrand de la Presle, UNPROFOR Force Commander, at Milići, in RS, on 22 September 1995. On 27 October
1995, the VJ also facilitated passage for de la Presle, to travel to RS to meet with General Tolimir and President Karadžić about the negotiations for the release of the French pilots. During the month of November, Vuković made “some serious efforts and did everything in his power to get the pilots released”. Finally, the Trial Chamber reviewed an excerpt from Mladić’s diary, describing a meeting between de la Presle, Mladić, Tolimir and Davidović in Jela on 3 December 1995. 

1380.      On 10 December 1995, at the Jela Restaurant in the Romanija plateau, FRY and VRS leaders met to discuss negotiations for the release of the crew to the French government. The FRY was represented by President Zoran Lilić, Vuković and Aleksandar Dimitrijević, Chief of Administration for Security of the General Staff, whereas the VRS group included Mladić, Gvero, Tolimir, Škrbić, Milovanović and Đukić. Prior to the meeting, the entire VRS Main Staff
delegation, including Mladić, denied having any knowledge of the fate of the French pilots. 

1381.      At the beginning of the meeting, President Lilić stated that “ t he French are convinced that the pilots are here … . Today is the last day for us to tell France what we know about the pilots
… We will sign, Momo General Vuković and I, so that nobody will be extradited to the Hague Tribunal”. For the first half of the meeting, Mladić still denied all knowledge of the French pilots, but later admitted that the pilots were in his custody. Once Mladić conceded that the pilots were in his custody, there was considerable debate among the participants of the meeting as to the appropriate course of action. During this debate, according to an excerpt from Mladić’s notebook, Vuković advocated for the release of the French pilots. He argued that “handing over the pilots prevents the division of the Serbian ethnic entity”. However, despite Vuković’s arguments, no decision with respect to the appropriate course of action was made immediately after his comments. Škrbić subsequently recommended to Mladić that the pilots be released to the FRY instead of France or Russia, so that the FRY could be a mediator in their release “to raise its image in the world”. Mladić then agreed that the pilots would be handed over to the French
Government through the mediation of the FRY. 

1382.      On 11 December 1995, at the Batajnica military airbase near Belgrade, Vuković organised a meeting between General Jean-Philippe Douin, the Chief of Staff of the French Armed Forces, and Mladić, accompanied by Tolimir and Gvero, in order to release the French pilots to Douin. According to Vukšić, Douin and Mladić initially refused to meet each other. In particular, Douin refused to speak to Mladić because he was accused of war crimes. Vuković served as a mediator in order to help facilitate the talks. Vukšić testified that Vuković’s actions were instrumental “ … in the simple act of getting two men into the same room”. Vuković played a decisive role in these conversations, according to Vukšić, Vuković:







was the only person who could influence his colleague, the Chief of General Staff of the French army, in order for him to understand that the situation he was in was considerably different from what he had expected. On the other hand, he could influence General Mladić in order for him to understand
that it was not a question of his vanity. 





1383.      Vuković led Douin to a room to meet Mladić to begin discussions that lasted 30 hours non- stop under “tense” conditions. Mladić initially refused to tell Douin whether the pilots were alive
or dead."> Finally, the negotiations concluded with the release of the pilots to Douin, in Zvornik on 12 December 1995. According to Vukšić and MP-902, Vuković made “decisive” contributions to furthering the release of the pilots, which led them to conclude that he was committed to the peace. In addition, Vuković’s role as a mediator in the release of the French pilots is also mentioned in Exibit D371, which states that:







… the military attaché has witnessed how efficient the role of the Yugoslav Army was, under the guidance of the Chief of the General Staff, in resolving sensitive problems in connection with the Blue Helmets who had been taken prisoner or detained in May and June 1995, as well as with the crew of the French aircraft . 





1384.      On 12 December 1995, in exchange for the RS release of the French pilots, President Lilić signed an agreement in which the FRY pledged a series of measures including its guarantee “that no citizen of RS shall be handed over by them to be called to account before the International Court in
The Hague”. Borović, the Chef de Cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff, recalled that the agreement, which was not signed by RS leadership, was issued by the Office of the VJ General
Staff but bears the stamp of the President’s Office because they had no other stamp available. According to Carl Bildt, the former European Union Co-Chairman of the International Conference on the former Yugoslavia (ICFY), French President Jacques Chirac conditioned the signing of the Dayton Peace Agreement of 14 December 1995 on the release of the French pilots. 
8. Vuković’s Attendance at Darko Mladić’s Wedding in July 1997

1385.     The Trial Chamber reviewed videotape footage which was recorded at the wedding of Darko Mladić, Ratko Mladić’s son, on 21 June 1997, which Vuković attended. It shows Vuković entering a home and speaking with Ratko Mladić and other wedding attendants. He is then seen standing up from a table in the center of the room where Ratko Mladić, members of his family and
others were sitting and enjoying live music. 
9. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the Rajac Facility in July 1997

1386.      In late July 1997, on a weekend morning, Vuković visited Mladić at a VJ facility at Rajac. The Rajac facility, which provided “rest and recreation” for VJ officers and their family members, was located on a mostly uninhabited small mountain, approximately one and a half kilometres away from the nearest village and included a hotel with lodging for thirty persons, three small weekend
homes, athletic fields and a restaurant. Mladić and his entourage stayed at the facility for over a
month under conditions of secrecy so that the public would not learn of his whereabouts. General Ćurčin provided “fatherly advice” to those individuals present at the Rajac facility to not disclose any information regarding Mladić’s visits because there were people “who wanted to give him in, in exchange for some money … ”. Milan Gunj, the manager of the Rajac Hotel, stated that shortly before Mladić’s arrival, the hotel was renovated and that during Mladić’s stay no one outside of his entourage stayed there. He also testified that for the first few days, Mladić and his
entourage solely used the food and drink they had brought with them. As their supplies
decreased, they gave Gunj money so that he could buy what was needed at the market. Very soon, however, they started relying mainly on provisions coming from the VJ that Gunj himself would pick up either from the Topčider warehouse or from the central warehouse in Belgrade. 

1387.      Ćurčin, who was visiting Mladić at the Rajac facility for the second time that month, testified that he coincidentally encountered Vuković in a parked car in a non-parking zone outside of the facility and eventually persuaded Vuković to visit the Rajac facility. According to Ćurčin, Vuković, who was traveling without security and dressed in civilian clothes, was on his way to Belgrade after visiting his mother in Koštunići. At Rajac, Vuković had a conversation and played
chess with Mladić before he departed for Belgrade in the afternoon. 
10. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the VJ Command Post in Stragari in the Autumn of 1997

1388.      In the early autumn of 1997, Vuković visited Mladić at the VJ command post in Stragari,
which was used for training and included a one-story administration building, a couple of small
houses/huts for personnel and other facilities. The facility was gated with a duty officer to restrict access and was located approximately 70 to 100 kilometres from Belgrade. According to
Ćurčin, after the end of the war in Bosnia, Mladić stayed at the Stragari facility “on and off” and
“would spend some time there and then would go back home or to some other place”. Ćurčin stated that he, Vuković and Mladić met in the mid-morning and walked through the woods, played games and had lunch. 
11. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the Rajac Facility in February 1998

1389.      Gunj testified that Vuković again visited Mladić at the Rajac facility during one day in late January or early February of 1998. Outside of the facility’s meeting hall, Gunj spoke briefly with Vuković, who requested that Gunj ensure that the meeting did not become public. During this visit, Gunj again provided food and everything that was necessary for him to stay there for a few
days. 
I. Vuković’s Access to Information
1. Background

1390.      The gathering and exchange of current and reliable information regarding the conflict in Croatia and BiH remained a significant task of the VJ throughout Vuković’s tenure as Chief of the General Staff of the VJ. Miodrag Simić, Chief of the 1st Administration within the VJ from
November 1994, testified that it was in “the interest of the VJ for the sake of its security to be constantly informed of what was going on in that area”. The 1995 Work Plan of the VJ introduces the priority task of “monitor ing and assess ing the military-political and security
situation in the surrounding area, primarily in the crisis areas of the country and the areas of the seceded republic where there are hostilities, ensuring prompt and reliable reports for relevant measures to be taken with respect to VJ combat readiness and the defence of the FRY”. 

1391.      There were multiple channels within the VJ through which information was collected and processed before it was reported to Vuković. As described previously, organs subordinated to the Chief of the VJ General Staff included the Sector for Operations and Staff Affairs, the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the Information and Moral Department. Vuković had operative lines of communication with his subordinates in the various units. Moreover,
Vuković had different channels of communication outside of the VJ - with the President of the FRY, the President of Serbia, the President of Montenegro, and with the FRY MUP. Vuković’s office received on average between 50 and 300 documents daily. 

1392.      Collegium meetings of the VJ General Staff were held weekly and facilitated the timely interaction and exchange of intelligence between its relevant organs. It would begin with briefings by the heads of the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the
Operational Staff Sector."> The Trial Chamber notes that an assessment of the state of FRY
security and relevant intelligence was a standing item on the agenda. 

1393.      Vuković also received coded telegrams from the FRY missions abroad. In the words of Borović, “the 2nd Administration also received such information, but we always double-checked that we had actually received the same telegrams”. 
2. Activities and Reports of Relevant VJ Organs
(a) Operations Centre

1394.      Within the 1st Administration of the General Staff, the Operations Centre collected and analysed information received on a 24-hours basis from lower units deployed in the FRY and from other federal organs within the FRY. This information was processed based on its relevance and importance and included in daily reports sent to the Chief of General Staff. Borović, Chef de Cabinet from November 1994, confirmed that Vuković received these daily reports. The
Operations Centre maintained communication also with the relevant operative centres of the SVK
and VRS. In his OTP interview, Vuković stated that the Operations Centre was used to monitor the situation in inter alia Croatia and the BiH, and that the “update level” for these territories was high. 

1395.      In addition, in April 1994, Vuković created an Operations Duty Team within the 1st Administration and tasked it with “monitoring and assessing … the situation in the VJ and the armed forces of the neighbouring countries”. It consisted of personnel from the Operations
Centre of the 1st Administration, the Security Administration and the Information
Administration. Information regarding military activities in Croatia and BiH was also supplied through communication lines the Operations Duty Team maintained with their counterparts in the SVK and VRS Main Staff. The Operations Duty Team prepared daily operational reports including inter alia a detailed description of the SVK and the VRS military activities, which were sent to Vuković. 
(b) Intelligence Administration

1396.      Subsumed within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs, the 2nd Administration, or Intelligence Administration, operated round the clock and produced daily bulletins on relevant intelligence information, including on military activities and plans of the VRS, SVK, ABiH, HV and NATO. The bulletins would be sent to Vuković. Moreover, the Chief of the Intelligence
Administration would report up-to-date information directly to Vuković by visiting his office. The
Administration would also provide regular reports to the Operations Centre. 

1397.      The sources of the bulletins comprised both regular reports from the SVK and VRS Main
Staff and other sources connected to NATO or UNPROFOR. 

1398.      The Trial Chamber has been presented with a number of intelligence bulletins produced by the VJ Intelligence Administration and it is satisfied of the detailed, up-to-date nature of the information as well as of the variety of sources employed in those bulletins. Siniša Borović testified that among the different types of information the VJ General Staff received, the highest degree of authenticity and reliability was given to that provided by the Intelligence Administration. 

1399.     Finally, the Intelligence Administration played a significant role in maintaining close coordination and interaction between the VJ General Staff intelligence apparatus and their counterparts in the VRS and the SVK. 
(c) Security Administration

1400.      The Security Administration produced a number of reports gathering counter-intelligence information, which were circulated within the VJ. A daily report was sent to the Chief of the Security Administration and members of his collegium. An extract of the daily report was sent to the VJ General Staff Operative Centre. A monthly report was produced and submitted to the VJ General Staff and the SDC. The VJ General Staff could also seek information from the Security Administration on specific issues. Gajić, who during the time relevant to the Indictment served as the Chief of the Counter-Intelligence Department at the Security Administration of the VJ
General Staff, testified that this was done frequently. 

1401.     The Security Administration had also contacts with foreign military diplomatic representatives, mostly from the Western countries, accredited in Belgrade. These contacts were usually maintained by the Chief of the Security Administration who would, if need be, inform Vuković about any important topics discussed with them. 

1402.      It was routine for the Intelligence Administration and Security Administration to share information with each other. 

1403.      The Trial Chamber notes that the Security Administration obtained information regarding the military activities of the SVK and the VRS directly from their counterparts in these armies. 
(d) Information Administration

1404.      The Information Administration was tasked with collecting and assessing the veracity of media information of interest to the VJ before transmitting it to the VJ General Staff with “what one may call a press clipping”. Vuković himself during a telephone conversation with Slobodan
Milošević, confirmed that he watched the TV news. 

1405.      According to Borović, the VJ never trusted the media treating the latter as being prone to propaganda and sensationalism. Although the VJ General Staff considered those sources, it always tasked the Intelligence Administration to verify any information coming from the media. 
3. Information Flow between VJ, SVK and VRS
(a) Coordination Meetings

1406.      As discussed earlier, the high representatives of the SVK, VRS and the VJ held monthly coordination meetings in Belgrade in order to exchange data and strengthen the cooperation between these armies. 

1407.      On 27 September 1993, Vuković issued the following tasks to the branch section of the VJ General Staff:







Ensure continuous, secure and protected communication with the GŠ SVK and the GŠ VRS. Ensure the inflow of as much verified intelligence as possible on the situation and condition in the RSK and RS and their surroundings, with assessments of the effect of that situation on the degree of threat to the FRY . 





1408.      Among the participants in those meetings were Vuković, Ratko Mladić, Mile Novaković and subsequently Milan Čeleketić or Dušan Lončar. Items of their agenda concerned “exchange of information and harmonisation of positions between the VJ, VRS, and SVK” including, inter alia, the issues of activity and assessment of the enemy, the results of the combat operations and
activities of the SVK and VRS forces, the security situation in the RSK and RS, logistical requests and personnel problems. 

1409.      As an example, the Trial Chamber notes that the issue of “operative-strategic disposition of SVK troops” was discussed during the May 1994 coordination meeting. In the words of one witness:







Descriptions such as this one contributed to the competent officers in the GŠ VJ and VRS getting a clear picture and full information about the situation and about the problems that existed, and, of course, the action that the SVK would take and the tasks that the SVK would implement in the forthcoming period, because that was useful for them in terms of their own
troops and their own tasks. 





Similarly, at the same meeting, Ratko Mladić gave a presentation on inter alia: “enemy strength, grouping and intentions”, possible further enemy operations and the situation in the VRS corps. 

1410.      The evidence suggests that at the coordination meetings no orders were issued by the VJ to the SVK and/or the VRS. Mile Novaković even testified that he attended the first two or three meetings, but decided to appoint his subordinate to attend meetings thereafter explaining that “those meetings were not of importance because they were not beneficial”. 
(b) Other Meetings

1411.      Slobodan Milošević and Vuković held several meetings with the prominent members of the SVK and the VRS. Some of these meetings were also attended by the highest authorities of the RSK and/or RS. 

1412.      The record also shows that Vuković was holding quite regular meetings with Ratko Mladić. According to Siniša Borović, the latter visited Vuković “once per month or less”. There were also meetings where Slobodan Milošević and/or various military and political leaders of the FRY, VRS
and/or RS were present. 

1413.      On 9 July 1995, Vuković visited the commander of the 11th Corps of the SVK in Vukovar and on a separate occasion in autumn he toured the units of SVK 11th Corps. 

1414.      The evidence also shows that Vuković visited RS in the period relevant to the Indictment. On 7 January 1994, he visited the Drina Corps Command."> The next day, he met with Mladić and Galić in Vogošća. On 12 August 1994, Vuković met with Mladić and the inner collegium of the Commander of the GŠ VRS in Crna Rijeka. Around 7 and 8 September 1994, Vuković visited Novi Grad on the Una River. On 18 July 1995, Vuković was in Han Pijesak meeting with inter alia Mladić. 
(c) Reporting
(i) Regular Operations Reports

1415.     The evidence establishes that in the period of October 1993 until August 1995, the SVK Main Staff was sending reports to the VJ General Staff on quite a regular basis.

1416.      In October 1993, the SVK Main Staff started sending weekly operation reports to the VJ General Staff. The provision of those reports was laid down in the following SVK document:







Chief of VJ General Staff Operations Administration has agreed for the SVK General Staff Operations and Training Organ to submit weekly operation report on the activities of the enemy, our forces and measures taken by SVK General Staff in order to have better insight into the defence of RSK, so the following has been done:-SVK General Staff Command has started to report to Operations Administration by sending a summary of weekly report. 





1417.      The task of operative reporting started functioning in November 1993. On 10 November

1993, the Commander of the SVK Main Staff set forth a detailed procedure providing for reporting from the SVK to the VJ General Staff on a twice-per week basis:







In order to achieve full and high-quality drawing up of the combat reports and their timely submission to the VJ GŠ …1.A combat report shall be submitted to the FRY VSO … twice a week (on Mondays and
Thursdays).2.A combat report, which is to be drawn up and submitted, shall contain the following information:2.1. Enemy – situation, intentions, possibilities, combat activities carried out …2.2. Our forces: combat readiness status, planning, carrying out of the combat activities and results. Managing and commanding and problems. Training: commanding personnel, commands, units, recruits, critical fields etc. …2.2.1. Combat morale status: positive indicators, negative actions, problems and causes …2.2.2. Material and health security: men, situation and problems …2.2.3. Mobilization and personnel issues …2.2.4. Security: security situation in units and in the territory3. Cooperation with the UNPROFOR …4. Conclusions and forecast:4.1. Enemy …4.2. Status of our forces, conditions for problem solving …4.3. Situation in the territory: overall influence on the SVK, direction and the intensity …5. Drafter of the report NŠ … SVK.
Report items shall be completed by 14:00 hrs. each Monday and Friday, and shall be submitted to the Operations and Training Organ , which shall further integrate, process and submit them by
20.00 hrs to the FRY VSO … . 



1418.      Miodrag Simić, a member of the VJ General Staff administration, testified that on several occasions Vuković unsuccessfully requested the SVK and VRS Main Staffs to submit timely reports to the VJ. At the same time, there is evidence of many examples of reports prepared in line with the abovementioned procedure and which between November 1993 and 26 August 1995 were sent
weekly by the SVK to the Operations Centre of the VJ General Staff, as well as to Vuković. There
is evidence that occasionally reports were sent more frequently - e.g. in April 1995 - even daily. 

1419.      Similarly, the evidence shows that the VRS copied the VJ General Staff, or Vuković personally, on the operations reports sent, inter alia, to the President of RS. According to Miodrag Simić this practice started even before Vuković became Chief of the VJ General Staff. The Trial Chamber was presented with many such reports sent between 11 April 1994 and 28 August 1994
that included sections on enemy activities, the situation in the VRS Corps and combat actions carried out by the VRS units. Simić, while commenting on one of these reports, called it “a high- quality comprehensive document”. Although the Trial Chamber has not been provided with
reports for every day in the period relevant to the Indictment, the evidence suggests that the VRS
sent reports to the VJ General Staff on a daily basis at least until 19 September 1995. On that day, Vuković sent a request to the VRS Main Staff to accept a group of VJ liaison officers whose task would be to compile daily combat reports to be sent to the VJ General Staff and issued an order regarding details of forming such a team to be dispatched as of 21 September 1995. According to Miodrag Simić, however, such teams were never sent to the VRS. 

1420.     The evidence confirms that the VRS reports were received by Vuković. It was common practice for a document addressed to the Chief of the VJ General Staff personally to be delivered directly to him. An order dated 1 July 1994 also instructed the “duty operations team” of the VJ General Staff to forward the daily VRS reports each morning to the Cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff. 

1421.     In addition to the VJ General Staff receiving regular combat reports from the VRS Main Staff, the operations duty team of the VJ General Staff was in direct contact with the VRS and could make requests for specific information. In a memorandum dated 11 May 1994, the VJ General Staff requested the VRS Main Staff to provide information on the disposition and strength of forces in RS at the coordination meeting to be held on 19 May 1994, and to “ensure that there is a phone contact through a secure line between the VJ General Staff Duty Team Leader and yours,
every day at 06:00 hrs and 20:00 hrs”. 

1422.      The SVK and the VRS were also receiving some reports and/or information from the VJ. 
(ii) Reporting during Operation “Pauk”

1423.      Novaković testified that during Operation “Pauk” he sent combat reports to Vuković, the SVK
Main Staff, and “from time to time” to the Serbian State Security Service to transmit to the attention
of Milošević. He would send them to Vuković “about once a week”. Novaković also stated that he sent “extraordinary combat reports to Vuković to “keep him posted of the situation”. 
(iii) SVK and VRS Intelligence and Security Administrations’ Reports

1424.      Branko Gajić, testified that the Security Administration had “some ad hoc contacts and exchange s of information” with the security bodies of the VRS and SVK. However, according to him, it had “no formal relationship” with its counterparts in the two other armies. He also testified that the VJ Security Administration never requested information from the VRS and SVK security organs nor invited their representatives to participate in VJ meetings. 

1425.      At the same time, the Trial Chamber has been presented with evidence showing that the security organs of the SVK sent reports to its counterparts in the VJ. According to Branko Gajić, the Security Administration of the General Staff obtained sufficient information from the “official organs” and there was no need to have its own personnel deployed in the RSK or in RS. 

1426.     Rade Rašeta testified that as Chief of the Security Department in the SVK Main Staff he was in daily contact with the Security Administration of the VJ General Staff and in certain cases he reported to the chief of the latter. The reports concerned the personnel of the VJ who were sent
for “temporary service” to the security sector in the SVK. Rašeta testified:







In view of the fact that the security service of the SVK used all instructions, all the rules, all special operational and technical means and cadres from the security of the General Staff of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, I had the duty, pursuant to all the applicable special measures and special measures as regulated by all our regulations, to report regularly to the Security
Administration of the General Staff of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. 





At the same time, he admitted that he did not have a duty to send reports to the VJ General Staff concerning other matters. 

1427.      The evidence also shows that the senior members of the Security Administrations of the SVK and VRS Main Staffs occasionally met with their VJ counterparts in Belgrade and passed on information about the military situation in the RSK and RS. 

1428.      The Security Department of the SVK Main Staff was responsible for preparing parts of combat reports which were regularly dispatched to the VJ and which formed part of the regular operations reports discussed above. 

1429.     The Chamber notes that on 22 September 1993, the Intelligence Administration of the VJ General Staff reported: “together with intelligence organs of the SVK and the VRS we have established a system of mutual daily reporting of all significant data of interest to all three
parties”. 

1430.      On 23 November 1994, the 2nd Administration of the VJ General Staff sent a coded telegram to the VRS Main Staff, stating:







On proposal of the 2nd Administration, the Chief of the General Staff of the Army of Yugoslavia Col Gen B. Vuković has agreed to dispatch one officer from the 2nd Administration of the GŠ to the GŠ VRS Intelligence Organ, with the task of assisting your organs in the processing of information on the activities and the combat engagements of the enemy forces and the timely
submission of the said to this Administration. The cost of his stay in your Command shall be borne by the 2nd Administration of the GŠ VJ, while the GŠ VRS shall provide him with the accommodation and include him in your work. 





1431.     Rade Orlić testified that in his capacity as the SVK Main Staff Chief Intelligence Officer, he would “from time to time as required” share intelligence information about activities and
movements of Bosnian and Croatian armies with the VRS and the VJ. Orlić would also request
 and, at times, would receive information from the VRS or the VJ when necessary. This type of communication was transmitted using telegrams. 

1432.      Similarly, the evidence shows that the Intelligence and Security Section of the VRS Main Staff was copying the VJ General Staff Security Administration and/or Intelligence Administration on its intelligence reports, even on a daily basis during some periods. 
(iv) Ad Hoc Reports and Communication Lines

1433.      The evidence shows that Vuković was also receiving ad hoc reports from prominent figures in the SVK and the VRS. The Trial Chamber has been presented with some reports sent by the Commander of the SVK Main Staff directly to Vuković. Similarly, on 15 August 1995, Vuković
received a report from the Air-Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence Organ of the SVK. The record
also includes a report sent on 11 April 1994 by Ratko Mladić directly to Vuković. The VJ General Staff was also copied on some reports sent by Mladić to various RS political and military authorities. Moreover, the document pertaining to the discussion held on 15 September 1995, mentions a telegram sent by Milovanović (the Chief of Staff of the VRS Main Staff) to Vuković informing him about the VRS territorial losses. 

1434.      There were also encoded lines of communication between the VJ General Staff and the SVK Main Staff, the SVK and Slobodan Milošević, as well as the VJ General Staff and the VRS Main
Staff. Such lines and their supporting infrastructure already existed before Vuković assumed the position of the VJ General Staff Commander. Members of the Main Staffs of the SVK and the VRS, and the VJ General Staff communicated directly through such lines. There were instances of the SVK Corps Commanders communicating directly with Vuković. There existed also analogue radio connections between the VJ, VRS and SVK. Moreover, the evidence shows that
at least as of September 1995, Vuković had direct communication with the Commander of the VRS East Bosnia Corps and indirectly also with the VRS Herzegovina Corps. 

1435.      Further, there existed an intelligence centre in Petrova Gora – in the area of the SVK 21st Kordun Corps. This centre was part of the intelligence department of the VJ General Staff and was in charge of monitoring activities of foreign military formations and reporting this to the intelligence administration of the VJ General Staff. This centre was not subordinated to the
SVK. 
(d) Conclusion

1436.      The Trial Chamber finds that there were multiple channels through which the information flowed from SVK and the VRS to the VJ General Staff. Through the system of regular reports,
monthly meetings in Belgrade, various other ad hoc instances of reporting and exchanges of
information, during his tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff, Vuković was well informed of all important aspects on the functioning of the SVK and the VRS as well as their activities.

1437.     The exact content of subjects discussed at the meetings and/or reports sent to the VJ General
Staff by the Main Staffs of the SVK and the VRS will be discussed in a separate part of the
Judgement devoted to Vuković’s knowledge of the crimes charged in the Indictment. 
J. Vuković’s Knowledge of the Crimes Committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica
1. Submissions of the Parties

1438.      The Prosecution submits that Vuković knew that the VRS had a discriminatory intent to commit the crimes in BiH and that the VRS committed ethnic cleansing in BiH. It posits that Vuković had this knowledge before becoming Chief of the VJ General Staff and “this knowledge continued throughout his tenure”. The Prosecution also submits that it is not necessary to establish that
Vuković had knowledge of specific incidents alleged in the Indictment. 

1439.      The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to demonstrate that the VRS was engaged in criminal behaviour or that Vuković knew of that criminal behaviour. It submits that UNSC resolutions that refer to wrongful conduct usually attributed such conduct to Bosnian Serb paramilitaries and not to the VRS. 

1440.      The Trial Chamber will first consider whether Vuković was aware of criminal conduct and discriminatory intent on the part of the VRS in the BiH theatre of war generally and second, whether he knew of crimes committed by the VRS specifically in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. Vuković’s awareness of the discriminatory intent of the VRS and criminal conduct in this context will serve as a basis for the finding as to whether Vuković knew that crimes would probably be committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica, and that crimes committed in those areas would probably be followed by further crimes.
2. Vuković’s Knowledge of the VRS’s Criminal Conduct

1441.      The trial record includes evidence regarding Vuković’s knowledge of the VRS’s conduct from periods preceding and following his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. The Trial Chamber will discuss the evidence relating to these two periods in turn.
(a) Evidence Preceding Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

1442.      The Trial Chamber will analyse whether the evidence demonstrates that Vuković was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ
General Staff.

1443.      The Trial Chamber recalls that prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff on
26 August 1993, Vuković served as the commander of the JNA Artillery School Centre in Zadar, Croatia until January 1992, when he was appointed Commander of the JNA 13th Corps in BiH. He held this position until the formal withdrawal of the JNA from BiH in May 1992, when he became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army of the VJ. 

1444.      In his OTP interview, Vuković stated that in April 1992, when he was Commander of the JNA
13th Corps Bileća Corps in BiH, he refused Karadžić’s offer to become VRS Commander. Vuković explained that among his reasons for doing so had been the fact that “they wanted an ethnically clean army, and he was against that”. 

1445.      In the same interview, Vuković noted that the Bileća Corps had responsibility over an area that contained three big Muslim enclaves, Stolac, Kula Fazlagića, and Podveležje. Vuković declared that while he was present in the area, “not a single Muslim was killed by soldiers and not a single soldier was killed by Muslims”, but that after he left in June 1992, “the exodus in this territory
started”. 

1446.      The OTP interview is corroborated by the following evidence. On 27 May 1993, when Vuković was the 3rd VJ Army Commander, the Supreme Command Staff held a meeting with the commanders of the VJ’s Armies, which Vuković was ordered to attend."> At the meeting, FRY President Dobrica Ćosić commented that the assistance of the VJ to the VRS and SVK “was huge, so the reserves have dwindled”. He added: “[w]e unnecessarily and irrationally used up massive war reserves. That is particularly apparent in Bosnia and Herzegovina. How could we allow one
commander using more than 5,000 shells around Žepa to unnecessarily destroy Muslim houses? For such an irrational act, he should, at the very least, have been stripped of his rank of officer”. 

1447.      On 26 August 1993, the day on which Vuković became Chief of the VJ General Staff, the VRS 1st Krajina Corps Command wrote a congratulatory letter to him, reflecting the desire to join the VJ and VRS to create a unified Serbian state:









Your appointment comes at a difficult and complicated time, when the Serb people are fighting for their freedom and dignity, proving to the whole world that their fight is justified, a fight that is
becoming increasingly acknowledged, justified, as it fills us with confidence that that we will withstand until a final victory.We wish you to settle at your new duty as soon as possible, to choose your associates, transform the army where needed, removing the weaknesses of the old system and the former JNA, creating together a unified Serbian state and army, a state in which all the Serbs will live together, proudly
and with dignity. 





1448.     The Trial Chamber is satisfied that this evidence shows that by the time he became Chief of the VJ General Staff, Vuković knew that the VRS wanted an ethnically pure army and Serbian state, and that he was aware of instances of criminal behaviour by the VRS against Muslims in BiH.

1449.      In addition to the foregoing evidence of Vuković’s direct knowledge, there is evidence suggesting that, prior to Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff, the FRY leadership was aware of allegations of ethnic cleansing in BiH. This evidence is summarised briefly below.

1450.      Between May 1992 and May 1993, the UNSC adopted several resolutions and issued statements expressing alarm about ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH, although the VRS was not expressly accused of those crimes:
- 
Resolution 752 of 15 May 1992 called upon all parties to the conflict to ensure that “the forcible expulsion of persons from the areas where they live and any attempts to change the ethnic composition of the population … cease immediately”. - 
On 30 May 1992, Resolution 757 imposed sanctions on the FRY, “deploring … that [this call] has not been heeded”. - 
On 4 August 1992, the UNSC President issued a statement referring to continued reports of widespread violations of international humanitarian law (“IHL”) within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and in the BiH particularly. - 
Resolution 771 of 13 August 1992 strongly condemned the practice of “ethnic cleansing” and expressed “grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of
[IHL] occurring within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and especially in [BiH],
including reports of mass forcible expulsion and deportation of civilians, … deliberate
attacks on non-combatants, hospitals and ambulances, … and wanton devastation and destruction of property”. - 
(v) Resolution 780 of 6 October 1992 again expressed grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of IHL occurring within the territory of the former Yugoslavia and especially in BiH, including reports of mass killings and the continuance of the practice of
“ethnic cleansing”. It also called on the UN Secretary-General to establish an impartial
Commission of Experts to investigate violations of IHL. - 
(vi) Resolution 808 of 22 February 1993 again expressed grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread violations of IHL in the former Yugoslavia including reports of mass killings and the practice of “ethnic cleansing”, and decided that an international tribunal would be established to prosecute persons responsible for serious violations of IHL. - 
(vii) Resolution 827 of 25 May 1993 reiterated the UNSC’s grave alarm at continuing reports of widespread and flagrant violations of IHL in BiH, including the practice of “ethnic cleansing”. Resolution 827 also established the ICTY. - 
(viii) On 16 April 1993, the UNSC took note of the ICJ’s Order of 8 April 1993 in which the ICJ had indicated that as a provisional measure, the FRY government should immediately take all measures within its power to prevent genocide. The UNSC also reaffirmed its condemnation of all violations of IHL, including “ethnic cleansing”;
expressed concern about the “pattern of hostilities by Bosnian Serb paramilitary units against towns and villages in eastern Bosnia”; and demanded that the FRY immediately cease the supply of military arms, equipment and services to the Bosnian Serb paramilitary units in BiH. - 
(ix) On 24 August 1993, the UNSC passed Resolution 859, which particularly noted that the Bosnian Serb Party had yet to comply with all relevant UNSC resolutions and
condemned “all war crimes and other violations of international humanitarian law, by whomever committed, Bosnian Serbs or other individuals”. The Resolution further expressed “ concern about the continuing siege of Sarajevo, Mostar and other threatened cities”. 

1451.      On 18 August 1992, five days after the UNSC issued Resolution 771, the FRY leadership discussed information it had received from the UN about the FRY’s alleged assistance in ethnic cleansing. Milan Panić, President of the Federal Government of the FRY, explained that he had been personally informed by the UN that he should stop the ethnic cleansing in Sanski Most, where
15,000 Muslims had been given eight hours to leave their homes and travel twenty kilometres to Jajce. Panić expressed deep concern that the FRY could not silence the persistent talk about ethnic cleansing, and that it did not matter what the FRY actually did or said but only “what the whole world thinks”. 

1452.      Also in August 1992, the UN Human Rights Commission appointed Tadeusz Mazowiecki as Special Rapporteur to report on the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Prior to Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff, Mazowiecki issued five reports, which concluded that ethnic cleansing had been committed in Serb-controlled areas with the involvement of “Serb soldiers” and “Serbian mercenaries”. Muhamed Sacirbey, the BiH Ambassador to the UN during the war, testified that Mazowiecki received most of his information on the ground, and that he reviewed the facts in the BiH first-hand. Sacirbey also
testified that Mazowiecki’s reports were extensively covered in the media. 

1453.      The commission of crimes “by Serbs in Bosnia and Herzegovina” was mentioned at the 6th SDC Session on 9 December 1992. At the 8th SDC Session on 12 March 1993, one of Mazowiecki’s reports was mentioned in the context of a discussion on paramilitary formations and alleged human rights violations. 

1454.      The evidence demonstrates that prior to Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff, the FRY leadership monitored what other countries were saying about the FRY’s involvement in the war, and that it was aware of allegations of ethnic cleansing in BiH made by the UN and by Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki.

1455.      The following observations and findings on the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge Moloto dissenting.

1456.      The Majority notes that no direct evidence shows that Vuković had knowledge of the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports issued prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. However, the Majority recalls that these documents expressing alarm about serious violations
of IHL, ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH were public documents. Furthermore, the Majority notes that between January and May 1992, at a time when the situation was already rapidly deteriorating in BiH, Vuković was stationed in BiH and was therefore directly exposed to these events. Thereafter, in May 1992, Vuković held a position of authority as Chief of
Staff and Deputy Commander of the 3rd Army within the VJ and in April 1993, he became the
Commander of the 3rd Army. As Commander of the 3rd Army, Vuković attended meetings of the
Supreme Command Staff where the FRY leadership also discussed events related to the conflict. The Majority also notes that the criminal allegations denounced by the international community were extensively covered in the media and of such a scale and gravity that the Tribunal was established to investigate and prosecute them. Based on this circumstantial evidence, the Majority finds that the evidence leads to the only reasonable inference that Vuković generally knew of basic
allegations of war crimes reported in the UNSC Resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports already
prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. 
(b) Evidence Following Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

1457.     The Trial Chamber will now consider whether the evidence demonstrates that after being appointed Chief of the VJ General Staff, and throughout the period relevant to the Indictment, Vuković was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and propensity to commit crimes.
(i) Statements by Vuković

1458.      In his OTP interview, Vuković was questioned about his relationship with Mladić while serving as Chief of the VJ General Staff. Vuković stated:







Well, he was keeping a certain distance from me, because he knew very well that I was against any illicit actions in the course of implementation of tasks. The entire leadership of the RS knew that I was against any destruction of buildings, against any …. use of force against the civilian
population and so on. 



1459.      At the 21st SDC Session on 7 June 1994, Vuković raised the issue of Muslim military students from the RS and RSK who were completing their education in the VJ. He warned: “this is very important, if we send the Muslims there i.e., to the RS and RSK , they’ll kill them”. 

1460.      These statements show that Vuković was aware that the VRS was committing crimes against civilians in BiH in the implementation of its objectives and was particularly hostile to Muslims.
(ii) Information Received through the UN and Other Diplomatic Channels

1461.      The FRY government received, through the UN and other diplomatic channels, a large amount of information about crimes committed by the VRS against the civilian population in BiH, including “ethnic cleansing”.

1462.      Sacirbey testified that between May 1992 and the end of 1995, representatives of BiH (although not Sacirbey himself) had extensive contacts with the staff of the FRY mission to the UN, including the FRY ambassador. These contacts were more extensive towards the end of this
period. Sacirbey testified that the FRY representatives were quite well informed as to the events
in BiH. The issues that the BiH tried to bring to the attention of the FRY representatives included reports on atrocities and military actions within BiH, reports by the UN Secretary-General on the condition of the population, and the effects of military actions on the humanitarian situation, including the delivery of food and medicines. 

1463.      Sacirbey also testified that, starting in the fall of 1992, the UNGA and the UNSC held frequent discussions about the war in BiH, and that, as far as he was aware, a representative of the FRY mission had always been present. The UNSC was able to draw on information from various sources, including UNPROFOR, UN rapporteurs, the EU monitoring system and other
organisations of states, individual UN member states, and the media. The UNSC also received
reports from the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and the ICRC. Sacirbey testified that while the UNSC received some confidential briefings, by and large, most of the information that was available to the UNSC was eventually available to all member states, as well as to diplomatic staff and the media. 

1464.      Sacirbey further testified that whenever the BiH UN Mission received relevant information about the war from a credible source, it would pass the information on to the President of the UNSC, or sometimes to the UN Secretary-General or the UNGA, with a request that the information be distributed as a document of that UN organ to all member states, including the
FRY. In some instances, the BiH Mission would send the information directly to the
representatives of member states. Sacirbey testified that the information forwarded by the BiH Mission mostly concerned such topics as the “human situation on the ground”, the “abuse of the population, what we referred to at that time as genocide”, and the “humanitarian situation, the interruption of food and medicines”. Sacirbey estimated that the BiH Mission forwarded about
200 documents per year, as it tried to convey—to the FRY, to the international community, and to the media—not only individual acts that occurred, but also a “systematic approach on the part of the
forces of the FRY and their agents in Bosnia”. 

1465.      On 27 May 1994, a Commission of Experts, established pursuant to UNSC Resolution
780, produced a report in which it examined the evidence of grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions and violations of international humanitarian law committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. The Commission concluded that a policy of “ethnic cleansing” had been put into practice by Serbs in BiH and Croatia and by their supporters in the FRY. Sacirbey testified that the report was the subject of extensive discussion at the UN—at least prior to the report being published—and was widely discussed and disseminated in the media. The report was published in its entirety in the Belgrade newspaper Borba between 14 July 1994 and 12 August 1994. 

1466.      In its report, the Commission of Experts described the pattern of ethnic cleansing in the BiH
as follows:







First, Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces, often with the assistance of the JNA, seize control of the area. In many cases, Serbian residents are told to leave the area before the violence begins. The homes of non-Serb residents are targeted for destruction and cultural and religious monuments, especially churches and mosques, are destroyed. Second, the area falls under the control of paramilitary forces who terrorize the non-Serb residents with random killings, rapes and looting. Third, the seized area is administered by local Serb authorities, often in conjunction with paramilitary groups. During this phase, non-Serb residents are detained, beaten, and sometimes
transferred to prison camps where further abuse, including mass killings, have occurred. 





1467.     The Commission found that the manner in which the policy of ethnic cleansing was carried out by Serbs in Bosnia was “consistent throughout a certain geographic area represented by an arc ranging from northern Bosnia and covering areas in eastern and western Bosnia adjoining the Serb Krajina area in Croatia”, and that the practice of ethnic cleansing was carried out in “strategic areas
linking Serbia proper with Serb-inhabited areas of Bosnia and Croatia”. 

1468.      The Commission observed that the “JNA and Army of the so-called ‘Bosnian-Serb
Republic’ have been involved in carrying out and facilitating the policy and practices of ‘ethnic cleansing’ in certain parts of the territory”, and that the “leaders of Bosnian Serbs influenced,
encouraged, facilitated and condoned” the most marginal social elements of Bosnian society to carry out the crimes implementing the policy of ethnic cleansing. The Commission concluded that the practice of ethnic cleansing was purposeful and systematic, and carried out by “persons from all segments of the Serbian population in the area described: members of the army, militias, special forces, the police and civilians”. 

1469.      On 23 September 1994, the UNSC issued Resolution 941, in which it took note of information provided by the UNHCR and the ICRC, contained in other relevant reports, regarding “grave violations of international humanitarian law affecting the non-Serb population in those areas of the BiH under the control of Bosnian Serb force”. The UNSC expressed grave concern at the “persistent and systematic campaign of terror perpetrated by the Bosnian Serb forces in Banja
Luka, Bijeljina and other areas of the BiH under the control of Bosnian Serb forces”, and emphasised that “this practice of ‘ethnic cleansing’ by the Bosnian Serb forces constitutes a clear violation of international humanitarian law”. Acting under Chapter VII of the UN Charter, the UNSC demanded that the “Bosnian Serb authorities immediately cease their campaign of ‘ethnic
cleansing’”. 

1470.      Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki continued to submit reports to the UN on the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia until August 1995, after which Mazowiecki’s successor, Elisabeth Rehn, submitted another report in November 1995. These reports were
released as documents of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the Human Rights
Commission. They were circulated to the entire UN membership, including the FRY. Sacirbey testified that these reports were also discussed extensively at the UNSC. 

1471.      Mazowiecki’s reports brought to light information about instances of murder, rape, forced deportation, ethnic cleansing, detention, denial of access to water and medicine, and destruction of cultural and religious sites. 

1472.      The evidence shows that FRY representatives received and were familiar with the content of Mazowiecki’s reports. In a note verbale to the ECOSOC sub-commission, the FRY Mission to the UN provided detailed comments on Mazowiecki’s sixth periodic report and noted that it had previously responded to Mazowiecki’s earlier reports. Further, Sacirbey testified that FRY representatives were present when the reports were discussed within the UNSC and other UN bodies. Sacirbey also testified that the reports were discussed in the media including those in the Balkans. 

1473.     The case between BiH and Serbia and Montenegro before the ICJ on the application of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide also put on notice the FRY authorities of allegations of VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal behaviour. The FRY responded to the BiH’s application of 20 March 1993 and the proceedings lasted throughout the Indictment period. 

1474.      The following evidence shows that Vuković was generally concerned about and aware of the international community’s views about Bosnian Serbs’ activity in BiH.

1475.      On 23 February 1994, Vuković wrote to Karadžić, Mladić and VRS Corps Commanders, stating that he had received information from reliable sources that “in the EU a mood exists that the smallest of incidents in the territory of the former BH, for which the Serb side could be blamed,
could be used as a cause for utilising close air support to UN forces”. 

1476.      At the 25th SDC Session on 30 August 1994, the Chief of the VJ Intelligence Administration, Colonel Branko Krga, under Vuković’s instruction and in Vuković’s presence, gave a presentation. Krga explained that since the FRY had accepted the peace plan of the Contact Group, the international community had taken a more favourable attitude toward the FRY. He noted that “after a long period of isolation and accusations, a profoundly new attitude of the international
community towards the FRY is becoming apparent”, as reflected in visits paid by foreign political delegations and in “more favourable coverage of the FRY by foreign media, including those from Germany and America”. Krga also analysed how the FRY should respond to imposed
sanctions. Krga explained that “ i n our contacts with international representatives, we must
insist that the issue of installing observers on the river Drina be never put on the agenda of UNSC”. He cautioned that even if the FRY were to accept observers, sanctions would not automatically be lifted, as new conditions were raised, including “the issue of human rights, readiness to cooperate with the International War Crimes Tribunal, etc”. Finally, Krga mapped
out possible political scenarios if the RS were to reject the peace plan. He concluded that “ h aving analysed the reaction of the international community”, the FRY’s best option was to continue seeking a political solution in the BiH, but noted that “it is obvious that the most important international players have agreed that they would not allow any party to achieve a compelling
victory, or establish Muslim or Serbian ethnically pure states”. 

1477.      The Defence argues generally that there is insufficient evidence to infer that the information about the war provided to the FRY Mission to the UN or to the FRY authorities in Belgrade was in fact known by Vuković. More specifically, the Defence argues that there is no evidence that Vuković personally had knowledge of discussions held at the UNSC sessions or of the BiH Mission’s communications to the UNSC. 

1478.      The evidence shows that Vuković, as Chief of the VJ General Staff, was directly informed about at least some of the UNSC proceedings and communications concerning accusation of crimes committed by the VRS. Throughout the war, the FRY Mission to the UN sent numerous diplomatic
cables to the FRY leadership in Belgrade to inform them about discussions held and resolutions
adopted by the UNSC. Vuković was copied directly on several of those cables concerning shelling and sniping incidents in Sarajevo, as well as the VRS attack on Vlasenica. That evidence shows not only that Vuković was aware of certain discussions by the UNSC, but also that Vuković knew that the VRS was being accused of attacking civilians and committing other serious violations of international humanitarian law. Moreover, Colonel Krga’s presentation at the 25th SDC Session shows that both the VJ Intelligence Administration and Vuković personally were aware of the
UNSC’s agenda and more generally of the international community’s political views and attitudes, including international media coverage, regarding the conflict in BiH. 

1479.      The Defence also argues that there is no evidence that Vuković read or had any knowledge of the Mazowiecki reports issued by the UN Commission on Human Rights. While there is no direct evidence that Vuković knew about the reports, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, makes the following observations.

1480.     The Majority recalls that the Mazowiecki reports were discussed extensively at the UNSC (in the presence of FRY representatives). The diplomatic cables copied to Vuković and the presentation by Colonel Krga also show that Vuković was put on notice of at least certain proceedings before the UNSC. Furthermore, the FRY Mission deemed the Mazowiecki reports sufficiently important to formally respond to at least several of them. The fact that, as the Defence points out, the FRY Mission rejected the content of the reports, confirms that the Mission was aware of their content. Mazowiecki’s reports were among the documents that BiH filed with the ICJ in support of its application against Serbia and Montenegro, a high profile case that was the subject of UNSC Resolution 819. Finally, Mazowiecki’s conclusions about the humanitarian
situation in BiH were discussed in the media, and Vuković was informed of the media’s reporting
on the war in BiH. On 22 July 1994, the Borba Daily published an article with the headline “What does the Federal Government hold against Tadeusz Mazowiecki’s Sixth Report on the Human Rights situation in the FRY?”, in which it described the FRY’s criticism of Mazowiecki’s report, raised in its note verbale to the ECOSOC sub-commission. 

1481.     The Defence argues that there is no evidence that Vuković or anyone from the VJ or VJ intelligence organs read the publication in Borba regarding the report by the UN Commission of Experts about violations of IHL in the former Yugoslavia. While there is no direct evidence that Vuković read the report as published in Borba, the Majority is satisfied that the publication was
available to him. In this regard, the Majority recalls the evidence that Vuković was kept abreast of media information through the Information Administration of the VJ General Staff. 

1482.     The Majority finds that, collectively, the aforesaid evidence leads to the only reasonable conclusion that the Mazowiecki reports—which were periodically issued from 1992 to 1995—were of such interest to the FRY authorities and were publicised to such an extent that the information contained therein was known to Vuković.
(c) Conclusion

1483.      The following observations and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge Moloto dissenting.

1484.      The Trial Chamber finds that direct evidence establishes beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew even before being appointed Chief of the VJ General Staff that the VRS was perpetrating gratuitous acts of violence against Bosnian Muslims and that the international community considered the crimes occurring in BiH to be of such magnitude that an extraordinary step was taken in creating the Tribunal. Furthermore, Vuković’s statements in his interview corroborate his direct knowledge of the ethnic hostilities during the war and that Mladić was using force against civilians.

1485.      In addition to the foregoing direct evidence, the Majority recalls the evidence that the Chief of the VJ’s Intelligence Administration, Colonel Branko Krga, made a presentation to the FRY SDC reporting the views of the international community, inter alia, on questions of human rights and the creation of the Tribunal. The Majority recalls that Vuković, as Chief of the VJ General Staff,
was in charge of the “highest professional and staff organ for the preparation and use of the Army
in times of peace and war”. By virtue of his position, he closely monitored the events unfolding in BiH, a bordering country where a conflict was ongoing. The evidence that Vuković received daily reports on information gathered by his intelligence and security organs. Miodrag Simić, Chief of the 1st Administration within the VJ from November 1994, testified that it was in “the interest of the VJ for the sake of its security to be constantly informed of what was going on in that area”. Against this backdrop, the Majority is of the view that Krga’s presentation is not an isolated example and that the VJ’s Intelligence Administration regularly informed Vuković of the events in BiH and general opinion of the international community. In this regard, the Majority recalls that the international community was widely concerned about grave allegations of human rights abuses committed by Serb military forces in BiH from the beginning stages of the war. These allegations were extensively and regularly discussed at the UNSC, in diplomatic circles and in the international media, and were matters of common knowledge. The Majority concludes that the only reasonable inference is that the VJ’s Intelligence Administration notified Vuković of these criminal allegations.

1486.      Based on the aforementioned evidence, the Majority is satisfied that Vuković, from the early stages of the war, was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH.

1487.      The Trial Chamber will now consider to what extent Vuković had specific knowledge that the
VRS was committing crimes in Sarajevo.
3. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Sarajevo

1488.      The Trial Chamber has been presented with direct evidence to show that Vuković, once he became Chief of the VJ General Staff, was informed about several incidents in Sarajevo.
(a) Diplomatic Cables

1489.     In 1994 and 1995, Vuković was directly copied on the following two diplomatic cables from the FRY’s UN Mission in New York: 
- 
A cable dated 7 February 1994 discussed the international community’s reaction to two of the Scheduled Incidents in the Indictment: the artillery attack on the Dobrinja suburb
of Sarajevo on 4 February 1994 (“Scheduled Incident A2”), and the shelling of Markale market in Sarajevo on 5 February 1994 (Markale I) (“Scheduled Incident A3”). It specifically referred to “Saturday’s incident in Sarajevo” and referenced an UNPROFOR finding that the “Serbian side was responsible for the previous attack on Dobrinja (4 February 1994)”. The cable stated that as a result of the most recent incident, NATO air-strikes against the Serb artillery positions outside Sarajevo were being considered. The cable also referenced an UNPROFOR finding that the Serb artillery positions were
“responsible for the attacks on civilian targets in the city”. - 
A cable dated 10 April 1995 stated that UN Under-Secretary-General Gharekhan had reported that the “situation in and around Sarajevo” had “worsened” and that “sniper activities and artillery attacks from large calibre guns had increased”. The cable added
that in one day, “three 120mm projectiles were fired on Sarajevo from the positions of Bosnian Serbs, after which UN requested NATO’s reconnaissance flights above the city”. 

1490.      In addition to the diplomatic cables copied to Vuković directly, the VJ General Staff received two cables from the FRY’s London Mission relating to the siege of Sarajevo. On 11 January 1994, the Mission informed the VJ Intelligence Administration that top British officials were of the
opinion that “the bombardment of Sarajevo must be halted at once”. On 7 February 1994, the
Mission—apparently referring to the Markale I shelling (Scheduled Incident A3)—informed the Intelligence Administration that “ t he mass media here and in the West are widely manipulating the latest massacre of civilians in Sarajevo and pressing governments to adopt a decision on air
strikes against Serbian positions around Sarajevo”. 

1491.      Vuković was also copied on a telegram from the FRY Mission in Rome, dated 9 December
1994, that provided information about crimes in Sarajevo. The telegram asserted that recent reporting by the Italian media about the situation in BiH had been one-sided, in that blame was placed on the Serbs and that the most-quoted sources were UNPROFOR, representatives of humanitarian organisations, and special rapporteurs. According to the telegram, the main point of
the media reports had been that the SVK and VRS continued their attacks by, among other things,
firing missiles on the facilities of the Muslim government in Sarajevo and blocking humanitarian aid on land and in the air, which would lead to hunger and freezing of the population in Bihać and Sarajevo. The telegram stated that by way of contrast there had been no media reports on “what the Muslims or the Croats are doing”. 

1492.      At the 18th SDC Session on 7 February 1994, two days after the Markale I incident (Scheduled Incident A3) had occurred, Vuković addressed the use of certain explosive devices in Sarajevo and cited the explosion of a shell that had resulted in “massive losses”. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that this discussion concerned the Markale I incident, as at the SDC meeting, Vuković described the explosion site as a small area that was closed off on all sides by buildings, where a large number of people was concentrated, and which featured a tram stop. Slobodan
Milošević added that the shell had purportedly hit a “stall”. The Trial Chamber notes that Vuković
also stated that people in the RS maintained that they were not responsible for the incident, and he expressed the view that the likelihood was indeed small. He added:







I think that it would be a good idea to prepare special projectiles that do not hit the ground and to have the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia issue a statement. Our military experts claim that this is impossible. We assume that the same was done in Vase Miskina Street- that the explosive was prepared ahead of time and placed in a number of spots and that at a given moment the signal was given to set it off when the largest number of people were there. Second, there are those who believe that one of their projectiles which was just supposed to mask those effects was actually used. That’s our understanding. The likelihood that a 120mm calibre projectile can kill so many people in that space is very small. We assume that the mujahedin did it, because they are against any kind of negotiations and agreements. Second the possibility that the Croats did it can not be excluded, so as to divert the attention from the threat of sanctions. It is impossible
that the Serbs in Sarajevo set it up, except from a distance. 





1493.      At a 29 August 1995 meeting in Dobanovci of the highest political and military leadership of the FRY and the RS, including Vuković, President Milošević addressed the fact that a shell had been fired at Markale and had killed a number of civilians. Milošević cited a UN source as
stating that it had been proved that the shell was fired from Serbian positions, while Mladić cited
a statement by a different UN source which, in Mladić’s view, demonstrated that the shell could not have come from Serbian positions 

1494.      On 11 October 1995, the Intelligence Administration of the VJ General Staff reported to the FRY MOD on the Markale II incident (Scheduled Incident A9) discussing UNPROFOR’s accusation that the VRS was responsible for the shelling:







By repeating the scenario at the Sarajevo Markale market on 28 August 1995 at 1120 hours, fresh conditions have been created for giving the Serbs yet another ultimatum by NATO. Namely, only half an hour after the event mentioned above, Muslim TV screened images from the location of the incident blaming the Serbs for it … . The following day … UNPROFOR blamed Serbs for the massacre, a ballistic expert carried out an expert examination only at 1100 hours. The expert examination was not carried out on location (they did not allow the Muslims to carry it out) but on the basis of photographs, sketches and TV images. The dead and the wounded were not examined,
nor was any type of medical examination carried out. 





1495.     In addition to the evidence discussed above, the Trial Chamber has been presented with significant circumstantial evidence which includes documentation by the international community of crimes committed in Sarajevo and widespread media coverage of the siege of Sarajevo.
(b) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Sarajevo

1496.      Starting in the spring of 1992, the UNSC discussed the shelling and sniping campaign in Sarajevo almost daily and issued several resolutions on the topic. Sacirbey also testified that leading up to the issuance of UNSC Resolution 764 in July 1992, he and his staff informed the FRY representatives to the UN directly about a shelling that killed dozens of people standing in a Sarajevo bread line, as well as about other aspects of the siege. Further, starting in October
1992, Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki began issuing regular reports in which he described the humanitarian situation in Sarajevo—reports of which FRY authorities were aware. Among other things, Mazowiecki reported that the indiscriminate shelling of Sarajevo had caused countless civilian deaths" and that hospitals in Sarajevo were routinely and deliberately shelled. Mazowiecki concluded that while “all sides are guilty of use of military force against civilian populations and relief operations in Sarajevo”, “the main responsibility lies with the Serbian forces,
since it is they who have adopted the tactic of laying siege on the city”. 

1497.      As discussed above, Sacirbey testified that he forwarded numerous documents to the President of the UNSC with the request that they be distributed as public documents to all UN member states, including the FRY. These documents included several letters from November
1994, May 1995 and June 1995, in which the BiH Mission reported shelling and sniping attacks by Bosnian Serbs against civilian targets in Sarajevo, such as the Holiday Inn and the Marin Dvor and Hrasnica neighbourhoods. In one of the letters, Sacirbey reported the killing of five children by a shell fired by Bosnian Serbs, and then further described what he considered to be a pattern of shelling and sniping, whereby long lulls in the attacks drew the civilian population out to
the streets, at which time “the shells from the hills hit once again, sometimes with no success in finding victims and other times claiming scores of them”. 

1498.      On 7 January 1994, the President of the UNSC issued a statement in which the SC strongly condemned the “continuing military pressure on and the relentless bombardment by Bosnian Serb forces of the BiH capital city, Sarajevo”, and called for an immediate end to the attacks on the city, which had resulted in “a high number of civilian casualties, seriously disrupted essential
services and aggravated an already severe humanitarian situation”. 

1499.      The 27 May 1994 report of the UN Commission of Experts stated that the “siege and relentless bombardment from the hills surrounding Sarajevo has taken a tremendous physical toll on the city and its inhabitants”. It noted that the Serb forces have “concentrated their efforts on weakening the city through constant bombardment from the surrounding hillsides” and cited estimates by UNPROFOR that the daily shelling ranged from 200 to 300 impacts on a quiet day to
800 to 1,000 impacts on an active day. The report found: (i) a pattern of specific targeting of
certain locations, including the Koševo Hospital, the public transportation system, the Dobrinja apartment complex, the flour mill and main bakery, and the shopping district; (ii) a pattern of
systematic shelling of cultural and religious structures and public utilities; and (iii) a pattern of random shelling throughout the civilian areas of the city, which had a “terror-inspiring effect on the civilian population” and resulted in deaths, injuries and destruction in “such well-known non- military structures as schools, open streets, public parks, football and athletic fields, cemeteries,
hospitals, and even bread, water and relief lines in the city”. The report also mentioned the
Markale I incident, noting that on 5 February 1994 at least 68 persons were killed and 200 others were wounded in the shelling of the market in the city centre”. 

1500.      As discussed above, the report of the Commission of Experts was distributed by the UNSC to the UN membership, was discussed extensively at the UN, and was discussed and distributed in the media —including through publication in full in Borba. 

1501.      Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki reported periodically about the siege of Sarajevo until
1995. As discussed above, his reports were released as ECOSOC documents and circulated to all UN members, including the FRY, and the FRY responded to the reports." Among other things, Mazowiecki reported the following:
- 
On 26 August 1993, “the civilian population of Sarajevo has been subjected to brutal violations of the laws on the conduct of war”, observing that “ t he arbitrary killing of civilians … has become a permanent feature of life in the city”. He reported that at the Dobrinja check-point, located 400 meters from the front line, 130 persons had reportedly
been killed and more than 300 wounded by sniper fire from Bosnian Serb positions. - 
On 17 November 1993, mortar attacks by Bosnian Serb forces on Sarajevo earlier that month had killed twelve persons, including children. - 
On 21 February 1994, “Sarajevo remains subject to indiscriminate attacks and to sniping, directed from territory held by the Bosnian Serbs”. He reported that by early January 1994, there were on average 1,000 shell or rocket impacts per day, and that many civilians had lost their lives. He concluded that “ a lthough a number of Bosnian Serb attacks on Sarajevo occur in response to firing by forces of the army of Bosnia and Herzegovina from positions situated close to highly sensitive civilian locations, most attacks would appear to be indiscriminate”. He also observed that the Markale I shelling (Scheduled Incident A3) which had killed 68 and wounded 200, was “one of the worst attacks perpetrated on civilians during the war”. - 
On 4 November 1994, “attacks by Bosnian Serb forces on the civilians of Sarajevo also manifest themselves by means of blocking of services essential for city life”. He added that “the heightened scale of attacks and threats to the people of Sarajevo …
reversed the dramatic improvements of last summer”. - 
On 16 January 1995, there had been an intensification of attacks on Sarajevo in November and December 1994. He reported that three children and one adult woman had been killed by sniper fire and mortars; that the Holiday Inn hotel had been hit by two grenades fired from Bosnian Serb army positions; and that Bosnian Serb forces had targeted
lines of people at a tram stop, injuring a 16 year-old girl and a 70 year-old man. He also noted that “ s niper and missile attacks continued to be targeted on an almost daily basis against the city centre, near the presidency building”. - 
On 5 July 1995, some sniping activity by Bosnian Serb forces against civilians in Sarajevo had been reported in March of that year, and that “[i]n late April the level of firing incidents increased and civilians were reported to have been killed or injured on an almost
daily basis by shelling or sniping”. He further reported that in May 1995, the Bosnian
Serb forces had shelled the Butmir suburb, killing 9 people and wounding 50 others (virtually all civilians); that a 18 June 1995 shelling of the Dobrinja suburb had killed seven and injured twelve civilians at a water distribution centre (Scheduled Incident A7); and that further shelling by Bosnian Serb forces in June and July 1995 had caused more civilian deaths. 
(c) Media Coverage of Crimes in Sarajevo

1502.      Between 1992 and 1995, events in Sarajevo attracted a “tremendous” amount of attention by the international media. As witness MP-433 testified:







T he entire world could follow the siege of Sarajevo, almost in real-time, hour by hour. There couldn’t be … a casualty on sniper alley either killed or injured by the Serbian snipers that was not immediately related to the press and with a number of photographs that would be broadcasted throughout the world. I can say, I believe honestly that the siege of Sarajevo was offered to the
eyes of the entire world, day by day, hour by hour, with all its atrocities being broadcast. 





1503.      Martin Bell, a BBC war correspondent who was stationed in Sarajevo several times from
1992 until 1997, testified that a number of major international press agencies were present in
Sarajevo during that period, including Reuters, the Associated Press, AFP, as well as television
media outlets such as BBC and CNN. In addition, all the large and even small European broadcasters sent correspondents to Sarajevo. 

1504.      Despite fluctuations in media attention, particularly during the early phases of the war, the international media maintained a presence in Sarajevo and covered what was happening to civilians. Witness MP-72 testified that there was a constant media presence in Sarajevo and that
the use of the media was part of Mladić’s general strategy. Witness MP-408, who was in the
Sarajevo area from October 1993 through September 1994, testified that both the national and international media were present in Sarajevo and reported mainly about the humanitarian situation of the population and about the sniping and shelling incidents. 

1505.      SkyNews reporter Aernout van Lynden began making live reports from Sarajevo in May 1992 on the inhabitants of the city living under siege, showing civilians being wounded or killed by Serb gunfire and how Sarajevo was hit “from every side by practically every imaginable projectile”, and “was a scene of wholesale devastation”. In June and in September 1992, van
Lynden also obtained access to Bosnian Serb positions in order to report events from their side. In September 1992, he met with Mladić, who took him to see the Serb artillery positions. This visit was filmed by van Lynden’s crew. At some point, Mladić can be heard on camera saying that “he holds the city in his palm”. 

1506.      Van Lynden testified that various political and military figures in the former Yugoslavia were familiar with his work. In 1994, Mladić confronted van Lynden about his reporting on Žuć and Goražde. That same year, the FRY authorities revoked van Lynden’s accreditation in Serbia
on the ground that his work had not been in favour of “the peaceful living-together of different
peoples”. In 1995, at the 50th Session of the RS National Assembly, van Lynden was referred to as the “famous Serb-hater”. 

1507.      Several witnesses testified that news about the siege of Sarajevo was reported in Belgrade, either through local broadcasts of international coverage or through Serbian reporters. John Wilson, who served as the Chief of UN Military Observers Mission in Bosnia from March 1992 until
15 November 1992, testified that television coverage provided by Sarajevo Television often contained graphic footage of attacks against civilians in Sarajevo. International media, including CNN and BBC News, also aired footage of shelling, civilian casualties, and damage to the city, which according to Wilson accurately represented the events that took place in Sarajevo. Van Lynden testified that many “Yugoslavs right across Yugoslavia” were able to receive SkyNews through their satellite dishes. 

1508.      In addition to providing video coverage, the international media also covered the siege of
Sarajevo in the printed press.

1509.      Morten Hvaal, who worked as a photographer for the Associated Press in Sarajevo from
1992 to 1995, testified that thousands of the photographs he took in Sarajevo during the siege were published in the international media. His photographs were transmitted to the Associated Press headquarters in London, which were then distributed across the world. 

1510.      In the autumn of 1993, after Vuković had become Chief of the VJ General Staff, Hvaal took a photograph at the French Hospital in Sarajevo, depicting a five-year-old girl named Irma Hadžimuratović wounded in a mortar attack, which also killed her mother, in the backyard of the
building where she lived. The media coverage of this incident led to the first proper evacuation
of wounded children from Sarajevo since the beginning of the siege. 

1511.      General Wilson testified that during his service, he received daily summaries of what was being reported in the written media from throughout the former Yugoslavia and abroad. Those
summaries showed that there was extensive coverage in the Belgrade press of the military attacks
against Sarajevo through artillery and small-arms fire. Upon relocating from Sarajevo to Belgrade in June 1992, Wilson saw broadcasts on Belgrade television airing images of very heavy fighting occurring in Bosnia. He recalled that the staff of the Yugoslav Hotel in Belgrade indicated that they had seen reports of what was happening in Sarajevo, and that they were very concerned about the safety of their families there. 

1512.     Martin Bell testified that Yugoslavian television received the material that foreign correspondents in Sarajevo sent out. Bell also testified that “quite a lot of Serbian journalists” came into Sarajevo. Further, he testified that many of the media networks initially sent their news reports through Belgrade, such that Serbian journalists were quite heavily involved. 

1513.      During the conflict in BiH, Muhamed Sacirbey’s staff paid attention to what was being reported in the FRY media. According to Sacirbey, allegations of shelling and sniping of civilians in Sarajevo were “certainly sometimes” reported in the media in Belgrade or elsewhere in the FRY. Sacirbey also testified that allegations of ethnic cleansing by the Serbian forces in BiH were reported, although according to General Wilson, the Belgrade media would have focused more on the Serb refugees than on the plight of the Bosniaks or Croats. Sacirbey further testified that BiH representatives to the UN in New York provided information about the situation in
Sarajevo at press conferences and through numerous interviews, and that accredited FRY journalists attended those conferences. 

1514.      The evidentiary record includes numerous articles relating to the siege of Sarajevo that appeared in the Belgrade printed press. Several of the articles published after Vuković became
Chief of the VJ General Staff discussed the sniping and shelling attacks on civilians:
- 
Reuters article in Borba, 15 December 1993: The article reported that “eight people were killed, while ten were injured in yesterday’s mortar and artillery attacks on Sarajevo”. The article cited hospital doctors stating that the killings occurred when two mortar grenades fell in the old part of the city. - 
Reuters article in Borba, 5 January 1994: The article reported that “ i n a fierce grenade attack yesterday in Sarajevo one person was killed while at least 10 persons were wounded”. The article went on to describe how during the previous days, many people had been killed by grenades, including an entire family of six and a nine year-old girl, and that
five children had been wounded. - 
NIN (a Belgrade weekly newspaper), 28 January 1994: In an interview with Mladić, the interviewer referred to the media coverage of the siege of Sarajevo and the widespread criticism of the Serbs for bombing the city. - 
NIN, 11 March 1994: Under the headline “The Burning of Sarajevo”, the article stated that General Mladić deployed heavy artillery around Sarajevo and that, “in accordance with the plan of vengeance whose ideological creators sat in Belgrade and in Pale, he began the long-awaited war feast”. The article explained that “Sarajevo was
destroyed, burnt, and demolished for months, and its people were butchered and killed”. - 
Borba, 31 July 1994 – 12 August 1994: Feuilleton in eleven instalments entitled “A Testimony From Hell”, described the experiences of an inhabitant of Sarajevo during the period from April 1992 to December 1993 and the sniping and shelling on the civilian
population. - 
V.I.P. Daily News Report (a Belgrade publication in English), 4 July 1995: The report cited the president of the ICTY as stating that formal indictments would soon be presented against Karadžić and Mladić. The report also stated, under the heading
“UNPROFOR Condemns Attacks on Civilians”, that the UN had “asked the Muslims not to use UN members as human shields” and had “accused the Bosnian Serbs of shelling UN HQ
in Sarajevo on Saturday” and opening fire on UNPROFOR members. 

1515.      Members of the FRY political and military leadership were aware of media reports related to BiH.

1516.      At the 22nd SDC Session on 11 July 1994, President Lilić discussed a promotion decree that had been signed by Karadžić, and expressed the need to verify “what has been published in the press”. When Lilić referred to “everything that happened in Bileća and Bijeljina” after other promotions had been announced, Slobodan Milošević asked “[w]hat happened in Bileća and Bijeljina?”, to which Lilić responded, “[a]pplauding Karadžić, all sorts of amazing things; all that was pompous; broadcast live on radio and TV”. Vuković added: “It was all reported in the press”. Further, in an intercepted conversation of 1 May 1995, Vuković told Milošević that he had watched the TV news, and Milošević indicated that he had watched it as well. 
(d) Conclusion

1517.      Based on the evidence discussed above, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Vuković was aware that the VRS was accused of committing crimes in Sarajevo. In support of this conclusion, the Majority makes the following considerations.

1518.      The Majority first notes that Vuković was copied on several diplomatic cables related to events in Sarajevo. The Defence argues that these diplomatic cables sent to Vuković provided “little information that Mr. Vuković could rely upon as knowledge for the commission of crimes”. In particular, the Defence asserts that the cable of 7 February 1994 from the FRY’s Mission to the UN provided no more information other than that the Markale I incident had occurred and that the international community responded by threatening with air-strikes. While there is no explicit indication in the cable of 7 February 1994 that the VRS had fired on Markale and killed civilians, the Majority notes that the cable stated that air-strikes would be carried out against the Serb artillery positions outside Sarajevo and referred to a finding by UNPROFOR that these artillery positions were responsible for “the attacks on civilian targets in the city”. The Majority is therefore of the
view that this cable put Vuković on notice that the Markale incident in Sarajevo – like many others -involved a civilian target and that the international community considered the VRS responsible. Further, the Majority notes that the cable from the FRY’s London Mission of the same date informed the Intelligence Administration of the VJ General Staff that the mass media were reporting on a “massacre of civilians in Sarajevo”, which the Defence concedes referred to the
Markale I incident. Moreover, at the 18th SDC Session held on the same day, Vuković stated not
only that the Markale incident had caused “massive losses”, but also gave a detailed description of the site where the incident had occurred, showing that Vuković had obtained information about the incident from sources other than the two diplomatic cables. Thus, when the evidence is viewed in its entirety, it becomes clear that Vuković was well-informed about the specifics of the Markale I incident, as he was about other attacks on civilians. 

1519.      In addition to this direct evidence, the Majority recalls that Vuković was generally informed of the UNSC’s agenda and specifically about some UNSC proceedings, and was in regular contact with the FRY leadership. Accordingly, the Majority is satisfied that Vuković was aware of the findings regarding the VRS’s crimes in Sarajevo contained in the BiH documents provided to the FRY, the report of the UN Commission of Experts, the Mazowiecki reports and the filings and
orders in the ICJ case between BiH and Serbia and Montenegro.

1520.     Finally, the Majority recalls that Vuković received daily bulletins from his Intelligence Administration, reports from his Security Administration and press clippings, containing media information from his Information Administration. In addition, the Majority recalls that during the Collegium presided by Vuković, briefings were held by the heads of the Intelligence Administration,
Security Administration and the Operations Staff Sector. Furthermore, he received reports about
local and international press coverage in meetings of the VJ Collegium. 

1521.      The Majority is therefore satisfied that this evidence shows that Vuković was generally informed of what was being reported in the international and Serbian press, and that he was consequently aware of media reports that the VRS was committing crimes against the civilian population of Sarajevo. Given that Bosnian Serb attacks on Muslim civilians in Sarajevo were widely covered by the national and international press, the Majority finds that the only reasonable inference is that Vuković knew of these general allegations on crimes against civilians in Sarajevo.

1522.      On the basis of the foregoing evidence evaluated both in isolation and collectively, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković, while serving as Chief of the VJ General Staff, was aware that the VRS was attacking the civilian population in Sarajevo. The Majority also recalls its previous finding that Vuković was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and propensity to commit crimes. Accordingly, the Majority is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew not only that the VRS was committing crimes in Sarajevo, but that individual crimes committed by the VRS would probably be followed by more
crimes committed by the VRS throughout the city’s siege.
4. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Vlasenica
(a) Vuković’s Knowledge of the Sensitivity of the Situation in and Around Vlasenica and the Eastern Enclaves

1523.      The Trial Chamber recalls that the third strategic objective of the Bosnian Serb leadership aimed at the establishment of a corridor in the Drina River valley with the eradication of the Drina River as a border between the Serbian states. This underlined the strategic importance of Vlasenica and the surrounding enclaves, which were located right along the Drina River border where the
corridor was to be established. The Trial Chamber also recalls the evidence that the VRS launched a series of attacks in 1992 and early 1993 in areas encompassing the eastern enclaves of
Vlasenica, Goražde and Žepa, leading to a flood of refugees into the enclaves. 

1524.      UNPROFOR Commander General Morillon and his Personal Staff Officer Colonel Pyers Tucker were present in Vlasenica during a surge of VRS operations in early 1993. Tucker noted that these attacks proceeded from one village to another, and villagers began to notice a pattern to the attacks and decided to flee as soon as the first few shells were fired. Around January or February 1993 Tucker hired locals to monitor local print and radio media inside BiH and radio media from Belgrade and Zagreb. According to him, the situation at the Vlasenica enclave was being covered in the international and local media. 

1525.      The Trial Chamber recalls that while in Vlasenica in March 1993, General Morillon was prevented from leaving the area by panicked residents and on that occasion he told the crowd that the town was under the protection of the UN. 

1526.      On 16 April 1993, the UNSC unanimously adopted Resolution 819 which: (i) proclaimed Vlasenica to be “a safe area which should be free from any armed attack or any other hostile act”; (ii) urged Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces to immediately cease attacks against Vlasenica and withdraw from its surroundings; (iii) demanded that the FRY cease supplying Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces with weapons and military equipment; and (iv) condemned the Bosnian Serbs
for attempting to evacuate civilians from Vlasenica against their will. On the next day, the FRY’s UN Mission in New York sent a cable to the FRY leadership informing it of the unanimous adoption of the UNSC Resolution. 

1527.      Sacirbey also testified that the UNSC distributed reports on the difficult humanitarian situation from 1992 to 1993 to all UN member states, including to the FRY’s representatives. According to Sacirbey, the reports became the subject of further debate at the UNSC. Sacirbey
explained that, by mid-April 1993, the situation in Vlasenica was dramatic and that recorded footage from the area was broadcast by the media. 

1528.      On 17 April 1993, Sacirbey wrote a letter to the UNSC deploring the “horrifying situation in Vlasenica” which he described as an “ongoing massacre”, and which was “so well documented by the media around the world”. Sacirbey wrote similar letters to the UNSC frequently, highlighting civilian casualties in Vlasenica and other enclaves resulting from attacks by Serb forces. These letters were distributed to all UN member states, including the FRY, and were
made available as public documents. In some cases, BiH sent this information directly to the
representatives of the FRY. Sacirbey testified that the FRY representatives read such documents since they subsequently responded to at least some of them either formally or informally. 

1529.      The continued and growing attacks against “threatened areas”, including Vlasenica and Sarajevo, and their inhabitants led the UNSC in May 1993 to declare other towns in BiH in need of protection as safe areas. In light of the persistent refusal of the Bosnian Serb party to accept the
Vance-Owen plan, as well as the continued grave violations of IHL and practice of ethnic cleansing,
on 4 June 1993, the UNSC thereafter adopted Resolution 836, authorising UNPROFOR to take necessary measures, including the use of force, in response to attacks against the safe areas. 

1530.      Vuković himself stated that, from the establishment of the enclaves until he was appointed Chief of the VJ General Staff on 26 August 1993, he was fully aware of the sensitivity of the situation in the enclaves and “discussed the situation very often” with Milošević. 

1531.      The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, recalls its finding that Vuković was aware of allegations of crimes being committed in BiH before his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff, through a number of sources. Against this backdrop and based on the evidence discussed in this section, the Majority equally finds that Vuković was aware of the grave existing threat to the safety of the Vlasenica enclave and its inhabitants, as well as of the criminal behaviour of the VRS
in general prior to being appointed Chief of the VJ General Staff.
(b) Vuković’s Knowledge of Events in Vlasenica Before and During the Attack

1532.      The Trial Chamber recalls that tension in the eastern enclaves reached a crisis point in April
1994, when the VRS attacked Gora`de. Following the attack, the UNSC adopted Resolution 913 on 22 April 1994 which “condemn ed in the strongest possible terms the Bosnian Serb forces for their continued offensive against the safe area of Gora`de, which has resulted in the death of
numerous civilians and tremendous human suffering”. Vuković was directly aware of the tensions
in the eastern enclaves and had direct knowledge of the attack against Gora`de. In reference to this attack, Vuković himself stated that the VRS “attacked it and they wanted to clean it up” and that he and Milošević “saved it”. 

1533.      Vuković himself admitted during his interview with the OTP that “the fact that Mladić entered Vlasenica was known, it was publicly presented on TV, here and abroad”. In a telephone intercept of 9 July 1995, following the VRS offensive in Vlasenica which commenced on 6 July
1995, Vuković was informed that “ t his thing around Vlasenica is mainly going well”. 
(i) Intelligence Reports

1534.      The Trial Chamber notes that the Defence does not dispute that Vuković periodically received “situation reports” from the VRS and that VRS intelligence organs sent reports to the VJ General Staff. The Trial Chamber recalls in this respect that the VJ General Staff regularly received various types of reports from the VRS, during the early days of Vuković’s tenure and prior to
14 July1995. The information contained in those reports was processed based on its relevance and importance and included in daily reports sent to Vuković. 

1535.     In addition, information and reports from the VRS intelligence and security organs were forwarded to the Security Administration of the VJ General Staff during the war. In this respect, the Trial Chamber recalls that Vuković received daily reports from his Security and Intelligence Administrations, as well as weekly briefings during the VJ General Staff Collegium. 

1536.     From May 1995, the VRS regularly sent reports to the VJ General Staff Intelligence Administration detailing the build-up of offensive activities in Vlasenica. The majority of the reports set out specific ABiH movements in and around the enclaves. VRS movements were not similarly reported with such precision. The Trial Chamber notes that the VRS reported the following information to the VJ General Staff:
- 
On 11 May 1995: a large number of Muslims … wanted to leave the Podrinje enclave and “noted several indications suggesting that the VRS can expect offensive activities … most probably by mid-May”. - 
On 18 May 1995: “Muslim propaganda is emphasising alleged VRS operations towards the enclaves in the Podrinje region”. - 
On 19 May 1995: “As part of offensive preparations from the Vlasenica and Žepa enclaves, the 28th Division of the ABiH has taken possession of important facilities …
linking the enclaves”. - 
On 21 May 1995: the Muslim leadership was trying to prevent the abandonment of the Goražde enclave and that Muslim forces in Vlasenica were reinforcing and replenishing forces along the forward line of defence. - 
On 26 May 1995: the VRS reported that “Muslim media” had “euphorically report ed on the allegedly large number of victims among the civilian population on the territory of Tuzla, and in doing so wish to force the continuation of NATO air strikes against
VRS features and positions”. 

1537.      In addition, the Trial Chamber heard that the geographical proximity of Vlasenica to the FRY was of particular military relevance for Vuković and the FRY leadership. Simić testified that any combat operations close to the FRY border would have had security implications for the FRY. Gajić confirmed that the fact that NATO air-strikes could occur in an area relatively close to the border of the FRY was something that the Security Administration of the VJ General Staff would have been interested in. Borović, who served as Vuković’s Chef de Cabinet, testified that the take-over of the Vlasenica enclave by the VRS would have had adverse consequences for FRY security. Vuković was aware of the developments and the potential security threats prior to the attack on Vlasenica, as evidenced by his 21 June 1995 order to the VJ 2nd Army Command to form
three combat groups to secure FRY territory bordering RS along the Drina valley. 

1538.      The evidence shows that from early July 1995 onwards, the VJ General Staff regularly reported and monitored the military developments in and around the enclaves in BiH (specifically, Sarajevo, Vlasenica, Žepa and Goražde). 

1539.      Evidence shows that from, 7 July 1995 until the fall of Vlasenica, VJ General Staff Intelligence Administration transmitted reports to the Operations Centre of the VJ General Staff and on the movements and combat readiness of the Muslim forces in and around the enclaves in BiH
with both specificity and an eye to the necessity for up-to-date information:
- 
On 7 July 1995: “Muslim forces in the enclaves of Goražde, Žepa and Vlasenica are maintaining a high level of combat readiness and have intensified reconnaissance, sabotage and surprise operations against the VRS”. - 
On 9 July 1995: “The forces of the 28th and 81st divisions engaged in provocative fire from the Vlasenica and Goražde enclaves and inserted reconnaissance and sabotage groups in the disposition of the VRS”. - 
On 9 July 1995: “The units of the 28th Division from Vlasenica operated from the safe area with the support of the Dutch Battalion and they also used the OT /armoured personnel’ carrier/ of the Ukrainian Battalion which is stationed in Žepa”. - 
On 10 July 1995: attacks by the Muslim army in the area of Sarajevo are detailed, and that “ i n the Muslim enclaves of Goražde, Vlasenica and Žepa a general mobilisation of conscripts was carried out and the units were placed on full combat readiness to carry out
offensive operations in order to down forces of the VRS”. 

1540.      The Trial Chamber has also been presented with a number of VJ General Staff Intelligence reports that were transmitted to the Operations Centre of the VJ General Staff at the time in which crimes occurred following the fall of Vlasenica:
- 
On 12 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported that “ o n the morning of 12 July
1995, units of the VRS Drina Corps entered Potočari village”. - 
On 13 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported that: “In the fighting so far, about 
500 members of the ABiH 28th Infantry Division have been taken prisoners. So far about
50% of Muslim residents have been evacuated from the Vlasenica area; the evacuation of the remaining residents is made difficult by a shortage of vehicles”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the daily report of the 1st Administration Operations Centre reflected the above information: “VRS units completely smashed the 28th Vlasenica Infantry Division”. It further reported that “ a bout 500 members of the Muslim army
have been captured in the combat to date. About 50% of the Muslim population has been
evacuated from the Vlasenica area and the evacuation of the remainder is made difficult because of the lack of means of transport”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the 2nd Administration reported the movements of the ABiH 28th Infantry Division from Vlasenica, which it said was “attempting to avoid skirmishes with and destruction by the VRS”. It futher reported that “at 1100 hours the VRS launched an attack on the Žepa enclave in order to take it and put it under VRS control”. - 
On 14 July 1995, the 2nd Administration sent a second report, to Vuković directly, stating that “Having taken the Vlasenica enclave, VRS units concentrated their forces around the Žepa enclave and on 12 July 1995 they issued an ultimatum to the Commander of the 1st Žepa Brigade … to surrender together with civilians without fighting, otherwise an operation was to ensue”. 

1541.      Based on the foregoing evidence, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Vuković was aware that the eastern enclaves were a constant source of tension and subjected to repeated attacks by the VRS. Vuković’s knowledge of the escalating tensions in Vlasenica strongly indicates that he knew that an eventual attack on Vlasenica would occur. The evidence also shows that Vuković received contemporaneous information of the take-over of Vlasenica by the VRS. The Majority is also satisfied that Vuković was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal
conduct in Vlasenica and elsewhere in BiH. The Majority therefore finds that Vuković knew of
the high probability that crimes would be committed against its population as a consequence of the
VRS attack on Vlasenica.
(ii) Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Vlasenica

1542.      The Trial Chamber will now consider to what extent Vuković had knowledge of the crimes committed by the VRS in Vlasenica. According to the Prosecution, Vuković had direct and contemporaneous knowledge concerning the crimes committed in Vlasenica and knew that they
were taking place by 12 July 1995 at the latest. 
a. Statements by Vuković

1543.      In his interview with the OTP on 7 December 2003, when asked when he first learned of the allegations of “mass murders and the Vlasenica and the magnitude of the disaster”, Vuković himself stated:







First time I learned about it in the cabinet of Slobodan Milošević when he asked me whether it is possible that Ratko Mladić did that. And I asked: “And what did he do”[?] Then he was surprised that I did not know anything about it. And then he said that mass murder occurred in the wider area of Vlasenica. And I had the feeling that he was caught by surprise by this event and I was
especially surprised. 





1544.      Vuković recalled this meeting to have taken place in Milošević’s office sometime between 15 and 20 July 1995. Vuković lamented: “When I heard from Milošević about the terrible crime, believe it or not, since then I did not want to know anything about it. I distanced myself from that because it is unbelievable that something like that happens … at the end of the 20th and in the beginning of the 21st century”. The Majority notes that, despite this statement, Vuković continued to approve the provision of logistical assistance to the VRS for months after learning of the Vlasenica massacre, and that Vuković kept urging the SDC to maintain assistance to the VRS. The Majority additionally notes that Vuković continued to visit Mladić in the VJ facilities of
Rajac and Stragari in 1997-1998; at a time when Mladić was wanted by the international community for the crimes allegedly committed in BiH. 

1545.      Vuković also stated that he received an important indication that “something was about to happen” when informed by the Užice Corps Commander of the mass escape of Muslims from Žepa,
across the Drina River to Serbia. He elaborated by stating that “there were some clues that
something was happening but what actually, that I really did not know”. Vuković, however, was acutely aware of the high probability that crimes would be committed in Vlasenica. Vuković himself expanded upon this statement and stated, in his interview with the OTP, that the Užice Corps Commander informed him of “what he was to do with all those runaways he caught at the border” and “complained that members of the Užice MUP wanted to kill those refugees”, leading Vuković to
ask Milošević to prevent the massacre of refugees by the MUP. 
b. Diplomatic Cables

1546.      The Prosecution argues that Vuković was directly and contemporaneously informed by diplomatic cables of the ethnic cleansing which took place in Vlasenica. The Defence argues that the diplomatic cables that were sent to Vuković provided “little information that Vuković could rely upon as knowledge of the commission of crimes”. 

1547.      Throughout the war, the FRY’s diplomatic missions at the UN and other missions sent numerous cables to the FRY leadership, some of which were copied to Vuković, conveying notice of the occurrence of several crimes, or at least serious allegations thereof, involving forcible transfers and killings committed in Vlasenica in July 1995.

1548.      On 9 July 1995, the UNSC was informed about a VRS attack on Vlasenica. A diplomatic cable from the FRY’s UN Mission shows that FRY authorities, albeit not Vuković, were informed of the VRS attack on Vlasenica no later than 10 July 1995. The cable reported that the UNSC was informed that, on 7 July 1995, “Bosnian Serbs had opened tank fire on Vlasenica, on which occasion 4 civilians were killed and 17 wounded. Bosnian Serbs continued shelling Vlasenica on 8 and 9 July”. The cable further reported that Bosnian Serbs had taken control of five observation posts, in the course of which one Dutch soldier was killed and 30 were taken captive. No evidence was presented that Vuković in fact read or received this cable.

1549.     On 12 July 1995, a cable marked “very urgent” was sent by the FRY’s UN Mission in New
York to members of the FRY leadership, including Vuković. The cable outlined the positions of
the participants of the debate that led to the unanimous adoption of UNSC Resolution 1004, which expressed grave concern at “the deterioration of the situation in and around the safe area of Vlasenica” and “the plight of the civilian population there”. The cable reported that the United States and Germany emphasised that the Bosnian Serb leadership in Pale was directly responsible
for the “exodus of the Vlasenica population which came under the jurisdiction of the War Crimes Tribunal”. Germany reportedly further emphasised that the consequence of the offensive on Vlasenica was “ethnic cleansing”. The cable also reported that “[a] Muslim representative of the BiH said that by non-reacting, UN de facto supported ‘ethnic cleansing’ committed by the Serbs, this time in Vlasenica”. 

1550.     The Trial Chamber also received evidence that, on 12 July 1995, the FRY authorities, including Vuković, were informed by diplomatic cable of the Bosnian Serbs’ shelling of Potočari, where Dutch troops and refugees were located. They were further informed about the holding hostage of Dutch peacekeepers by the VRS and the fact that more than 25,000 refugees were
heading towards Tuzla. 

1551.      On 12 July 1995, the FRY Embassy in London sent a cable to the FRY leadership, including
Vuković, about the fall of Vlasenica, stating:







The Media in Great Britain are putting the events of Vlasenica into the limelight, stating specifically the Serbs of BiH are ignoring completely the warnings of UN and NATO. It has been pointed out especially about another ‘Humanitarian Disaster’, even though there are some rumours that the leadership of RS in its announcement pointed out that the civilians were not
endangered. 





1552.      Similarly, on 13 July 1995, the FRY Embassy in Bonn sent a cable to the FRY leadership, including Vuković, concerning German reactions to the entry of Bosnian Serb troops in Vlasenica. The cable stated:







With a great intensity and publicity, German media informed the domestic public about the extension of the “Serb Aggression on civil population of Vlasenica” and about extremely negative consequences of further engagement of the International Community with regards to solving the crisis in Bosnia. Numerous comments in daily papers and on special state and private TV station broadcasts, the suffering of civilians had been shown as well as the helplessness of the Dutch blue
helmets and the “Arrogant behaviour” of the chief of the Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadžić. 





1553.     On 14 July 1995, Vuković was informed by diplomatic cable of concerns of the UN member states regarding the abuse and forced expulsion of civilians in Vlasenica. The cable explained that “since dramatic news of alleged abuse of Muslim population and their forced expulsion continue to arrive from the field, in addition to the detention of UNPROFOR members and attacks on the second ‘protected area of Žepa’, the UNSC was forced to react with a presidential statement,
even though it adopted a resolution on the same issue two days ago”. The cable continued:







Information from the field of alleged abuse of civilians and prisoners from Vlasenica and their forced expulsion is of special concern for the UN. The Secretary General and other leaders warn that these are severe violations of humanitarian law and demand that they stop. One of the primary tasks of the UN and the humanitarian agencies will be to get involved in the situation as soon as
possible to provide the threatened population with the necessary humanitarian help. 




c. Meetings with Members of the VRS

1554.      The Prosecution maintains that Vuković had access to Mladić and communicated with him while several crimes were occurring in Vlasenica. The Defence does not dispute that Vuković had direct communications with VRS officers, including Mladić. Instead, the Defence maintains that the Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that such communications contained any information about criminal behaviour by the VRS. 

1555.      Photographic evidence shows that, on 18 July 1995, at the time when the crimes were occurring in Vlasenica, Vuković attended a lunch meeting with, inter alia, Mladić and Gvero in Han Pijesak. Ned Krayishnik testified that the mood at lunch was cheerful and that the “liberation” of
Vlasenica was discussed. According to him, there were no signs of disagreement between
Vuković and Mladić. He further testified that he did not recall specific statements, but testified that this was the first occasion when he heard about the resolution of the “problems with
Vlasenica”. He further testified “soldiers were also talking about the liberation of
Vlasenica ”. 

1556.      The Trial Chamber also received evidence that, on 24 July 1995, Vuković met with Mladić and Slobodan Milošević, and that Milošević then lamented that “Vlasenica and Žepa have damaged us very greatly”. 
d. Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Vlasenica

1557.      The Trial Chamber has also been presented with evidence that FRY authorities, albeit without mentioning Vuković specifically, were receiving contemporaneous information from the international community about crimes being committed in Vlasenica.

1558.      On 9 July 1995, the UNSC was informed about a VRS attack on Vlasenica. On 13 July
1995, the UNSC and the UNGA were informed by the Permanent Mission of BiH to the UN that Serb forces were separating the Bosnian Muslims in Vlasenica, that a number of trucks with detained men were taken to unknown destinations and that there were substantial grounds to fear their execution. The Trial Chamber heard from Sacirbey that this letter would have been
circulated to all member states, including the FRY and observer missions. 

1559.      On 14 July 1995, the UNSC discussed the expulsion of the civilian population from Vlasenica by the Bosnian Serbs, as well as the fate of approximately 4,000 Bosnian Muslim men and boys detained there. On the same day, the President of the UNSC issued the following statement:







The UNSC recalls its R esolution 1004 (1995). The Council is deeply concerned about the ongoing forced relocation of tens of thousands of civilians from the Vlasenica safe area to the Tuzla region by the Bosnian Serb party. Such a forced relocation is a clear violation of the human rights of the civilian population. It is especially concerned about reports of grave mistreatment and killing of innocent civilians. It is equally concerned about reports that up to 4,000 men and boys have been forcibly removed by the Bosnian Serb party from the Vlasenica safe area. … The UNSC again condemns the unacceptable practice of ‘ethnic cleansing’ and reaffirms that those who have committed or have ordered the commission of such acts will be held individually
responsible in respect of such acts. 





1560.      On 14 July 1995, the FRY’s UN Mission in New York sent a cable to FRY leadership, although not to Vuković directly, about the President’s statement. That cable stated as follows:







Today (Friday 14 July), at the request of the USA, the UNSC has adopted, without major problems, the presidential statement (hereby sent by fax), whereby concern was expressed over the expulsion of civilian population from Vlasenica by the Bosnian Serbs, as well as over the report on the killings and mistreatment of civilians. … The UNSC has condemned the unacceptable practice of “ethnic cleansing” and confirmed that those who engaged in or ordered it will
individually be held accountable. 





1561. On 22 July 1995, a VJ General Staff report stated that “Western intelligence services are intensively investigating what the VRS intends to do next in the Muslim enclaves Goražde and Bihać”. 

1562. On 25 July 1995, the UNSC condemned the Bosnian Serb offensive “in the strongest possible terms” and expressed particular concern “at the plight of the civilian population”. 

1563. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that official documents of the UNSC were passed on to FRY authorities. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that Vuković was in regular contact with the FRY leadership and was generally informed of UNSC discussions. The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, therefore finds that Vuković was aware of reports and other documentations informing the
FRY leadership of crimes committed by the VRS. 
e. Indictments of the Tribunal

1564. While the conflict was ongoing, the Tribunal issued joint indictments against Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić on 24 July 1995, and again on 14 November 1995, for, inter alia, crimes committed in Vlasenica. The Trial Chamber received evidence that the indictment of 24
July 1995, along with a copy of the arrest warrant, was officially transmitted to FRY authorities in
Belgrade. 

1565. On 26 July 1995, the Politika, a Belgrade daily newspaper, reported that the Tribunal had indicted Radovan Karadžić and Ratko Mladić. It reported that Antonio Cassese, the President of
the Tribunal, had issued a statement declaring that the indicted individuals “will not be in a position to participate in peace talks”. 

1566. Evidence presented to the Trial Chamber demonstrates that Vuković knew about the allegations against Mladić. Vuković was informed at the VJ Collegium on 30 October 1995 that “Serbs are again accused of execution of the Muslims”. At the VJ Collegium on 29 December
1995, Vuković acknowledged that Mladić could not serve as a liaison with IFOR because “he has been suspected of war crimes”. Finally, the Trial Chamber notes that, not only did Vuković know about the allegations, but that he played an active role in protecting Mladić. In an intercepted
conversation on 9 December 1995, Vuković stated that “nobody will extradite Mladić to the
Tribunal”. 
f. Media Coverage of Crimes in Vlasenica

1567. The events of Vlasenica were extensively covered by international and Serbian media, making headlines all over the world. 

1568. On 13 July 1995, Agence France-Presse reported on the “wholesale shipment of the enclave’s population out of the pocket personally organized by the Bosnian Serb Commander Ratko Mladić”. It further reported that the UNHCR called the removal of residents from Vlasenica “one of the most blatant examples of ethnically motivated forced displacement we have seen yet in war”. 

1569. On 14 July 1995, a report from Agence France-Presse cited a local official from Tuzla stating that “Bosnian Serb forces are executing men they took prisoner after capturing the government enclave of Vlasenica”. It further reported another local official in charge of social
policy and refugees as stating that Serbian soldiers had dragged refugees fleeing Vlasenica and
“executed them on the spot”. The official further stated that some men had been taken to the border village of Bratunac and that others were taken to a camp where they were killed. 

1570. On 20 July 1995, the European edition of Oslobodjenje reported that, on 4 July 1995, two days before the start of the offensive in the area of Vlasenica, VJ 1st Army Commander General Dragoljub Ojdanić, a subordinate of Vuković, reportedly issued the following public statement: “The two Muslim enclaves of Vlasenica and Žepa are situated in the heart of Serb territory and it should not have been allowed to form them. It is impossible to remain this way. It has to be solved militarily”. The article expressly named Vuković and a number of his subordinates, and described both Ojdanić and Mladić as “war criminals”. 

1571. The media in Belgrade also reported on the crimes which were taking place in
Vlasenica. 

1572. On 12 July 1995, Borba published an article concerning the fall of Vlasenica and reported that “representatives of humanitarian organizations said that Vlasenica was ‘completely empty’ and that thousands of Bosnian Muslims were fleeing Vlasenica ahead of Bosnian Serb attacks”. On 14 July 1995, Borba published another article entitled “Voluntary Ethnic Cleansing”, stating that the whereabouts of 7,000 people from Vlasenica were unknown, adding that this number included 3,000 ABiH soldiers, who were hiding in the surrounding woods and hills. On 20 July
1995, Borba reported that the UNHCR stated that “ t he Bosnian Serbs are carrying out ethnic terror more systematically than ever before”. On 24 July 1995, Borba published an article entitled “Serb Behavior in Vlasenica Barbaric”, reporting DutchBat members’ allegations that they had witnessed Bosnian Serbs killing and torturing Muslims. 

1573. On 21 July 1995, Intervju, a Belgrade-based weekly, published an article describing the gathering of “28,000 Muslims of all ages” at the Dutch base in Potočari. The article depicted the
empty streets of Vlasenica, the looting of apartments, and the surrendering of Muslim men near
1573.      On 21 July 1995, Intervju, a Belgrade-based weekly, published an article describing the gathering of “28,000 Muslims of all ages” at the Dutch base in Potočari. The article depicted the
empty streets of Vlasenica, the looting of apartments, and the surrendering of Muslim men near
Kravica. It described the participation of VRS officers in the take-over of Vlasenica, among them Krstić, Milovanović, Gvero, Tolimir and Ljubiša Borovčanin. 

1574.      On the same date, the Belgrade weekly Nin published an article entitled “Ghost Town”, in which it stated that “ a lready a week has passed since the fall of Vlasenica and it is still not clear what happened to its citizens. The majority was reportedly loaded by Bosnian Serbs into buses and trucks and taken towards Tuzla, Kladanj and other locations in the territory controlled by the government in Sarajevo, but there is no reliable information on the whereabouts of thousands of
others”. The article continued, stating that according to a UN source, “General Mladić called the
commander of the Dutch ‘blue helmets’ and told him that hundreds of people had been killed in the villages of the Vlasenica municipality”. The article also reported that a piece on Vlasenica broadcast by Studio B aired images of several male bodies in a draining ditch and very briefly the camera showed what appeared to be a pile of bodies, three or four layers deep, in front of a depot, while a journalist commented that “many Muslim soldiers had been killed”. 

1575.      The Prosecution asserts that Vuković was provided with daily summaries of news/media reports relating to the events in Vlasenica and that he personally watched televised media coverage and read newspapers. At the same time, the Defence submits that no evidence was presented before the Trial Chamber to support the assertion that Vuković watched or read news from any international media source and that it cannot be inferred that information contained in open source
materials or international news media reports was available to Vuković. 

1576.     The Trial Chamber heard from Gajić that the earliest information regarding the crimes committed in Vlasenica was gleaned by the VJ from media reports. He testified that he received the information through a foreign news agency report 10 to 15 days after its publication some time after 20 July 1995. However, the witness maintained that the VJ was not notified that any crimes occurred at Vlasenica. He only saw contradictory reports in the media. He admitted that he
“did nothing” with this information because it “wasn’t a counter-intelligence issue”. He testified
that other bodies would have been responsible for looking into these media reports, such as the judiciary and the VRS. 

1577.      The Prosecution asserts that it is “impossible that the VJ intelligence apparatus was ignorant of the crimes which were occurring until two weeks after the foreign media had reported them”. The Defence asserts that the Prosecution has failed to demonstrate that information from international news reports was provided to Vuković in intelligence or information reports. 

1578.      Gajić was not credible when he testified that the Security Administration of the VJ General Staff received information regarding crimes in Vlasenica only after 20 July 1995. The Majority recalls that the Intelligence and Security Administration monitored the situation in and around the area of Vlasenica as shown by the reports that were sent to the VJ General Staff between 7 and 14
July 1995. The evidence also shows that the VJ had a security interest in monitoring the
situation in the Vlasenica area as it was close to the FRY border. In this regard, the Majority also notes that Gajić, when pressed by the Prosecution in cross-examination, conceded that the conflict in Vlasenica was near the FRY border and actually presented a security problem that could lead to an inflow of refugees. Gajić also testified that its security organs had an obligation to duly verify the authenticity of data and intelligence received from a number of different sources. The Majority is therefore satisfied that the only reasonable inference available from the evidence is that the VJ General Staff through its intelligence and security organs must have received information regarding crimes committed in Vlasenica well before 20 July 1995. Furthermore, the evidence discussed above shows that the media reported information about certain crimes allegedly occurring in Vlasenica, especially the forcible displacement of Bosnian Muslims, as early as 13
July 1995. The Majority recalls that the VJ General Staff and Vuković himself monitored the
media’s coverage of the war in the BiH. Based on these considerations, the Majority therefore finds that Vuković was aware of allegations of crimes as early as 13 July 1995.
(c) Conclusion

1579.      The Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, is satisfied that Vuković, while serving as Chief of the
VJ General Staff, was aware of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal behaviour towards
Bosnian Muslims, as shown, inter alia, by the events in Sarajevo and Vlasenica between 1993 and
1995. The Majority therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew that individual crimes committed by the VRS before the attack on Vlasenica would probably be followed by more crimes committed by the VRS after the take-over of the enclave in July 1995. The Majority is also satisfied that Vuković had contemporaneous knowledge of allegations that the VRS was committing crimes in Vlasenica.
VII. 	VUKOVIĆ’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR AIDING AND ABETTING CRIMES UNDER ARTICLE 7(1)
A. Elements of Aiding and Abetting

1580.      Borislav Vuković is indicted under Article 7(1) of the Statute of the Tribunal for aiding and abetting crimes committed by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. In order for Vuković to be held responsible for aiding and abetting, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that Vuković provided practical assistance, encouragement, or moral support to the principal perpetrator of the crime, which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. An alleged aider and abettor is
always accessory to a crime perpetrated by another person, the principal. For an accused to be
liable for aiding and abetting, the underlying crime must have been committed by the principal perpetrator. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that Vuković knew that his acts assisted the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrator and that he was aware of the “essential elements” of the crime, including the state of mind of the principal perpetrator. However, it is not necessary that he shared the mens rea required for the crime. 

1581.      The Trial Chamber will first analyse the objective elements and discuss the mental element separately.
B. Findings on Objective Elements of Aiding and Abetting
1. Submissions of the Parties

1582.      The Prosecution argues that the following had a substantial effect of the commission of crimes by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica: Vuković’s logistic assistance, personnel assistance, deployment of VJ troops to the Sarajevo war theatre and the creation of an environment of
impunity. The Prosecution asserts that “ w ithout this assistance in men and materiel, the VRS would not have been a functioning army, would have been unable to prosecute the war in BiH at such length and with such ferocity, and would have been unable to commit the crimes tragically characteristic of that war”. 

1583.      The Defence argues that none of the methods of alleged assistance presented by the Prosecution, whether individually or collectively, establish Vuković’s liability under Article 7(1) of the Statute and that the Prosecution has failed to establish a nexus between Vuković and any crimes perpetrated by the VRS. 

1584.      The Defence also argues that the relevant question is not whether Vuković provided “a substantial amount” of weaponry and other logistical support, but whether such assistance had “a substantial effect” on the perpetration of the crimes, which the evidence does not establish. In the Defence’s view, finding Vuković guilty of aiding and abetting the charged crimes would amount to “the indirect criminalisation of the waging of war”. 

1585.      Finally, the Defence argues that for ex post facto assistance to amount to aiding and abetting, the Prosecution must prove that a prior agreement existed between the accused and the perpetrator at the time of the planning, preparation or execution of the crime. It concludes that
no such agreement concerning crimes existed between Vuković and the VRS. 
2. Preliminary Remarks

1586.      With respect to the Prosecution argument of a “creation of an environment of impunity”, the Trial Chamber notes that the Prosecution formulates this aspect of Vuković’s alleged responsibility as a direct consequence of his “complete failure to prevent the crimes and to punish his subordinates
for committing them”. The Defence argues that any argument in this vein should only be considered within the ambit of Article 7(3) liability, and any effort by the Prosecution to do otherwise would be in an effort to circumvent the stringent requirement of Article 7(3) liability. The Trial Chamber finds that this aspect of the Prosecution’s theory can only be discussed once and if a superior-subordinate relationship between Vuković and the principal perpetrators is established.
As will be detailed later in this Judgement, the Trial Chamber did not find that a superior- subordinate relationship existed between Vuković and the VRS, including its officers serving in the
30th PC. In the absence of Vuković’s material ability to prevent or punish the perpetrators of the crimes, the Trial Chamber will not enter any finding as to whether an environment of impunity was created and what effect it had on the commission of the crimes.

1587.      The following analysis and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge
Moloto dissenting.
3. The VRS’s War Strategy Encompassed the Commission of Crimes

1588.      Borislav Vuković stands charged with aiding and abetting war crimes and crimes against humanity committed by VRS members against civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. Vuković is not charged with helping the VRS wage war per se, which is not a crime under the Statute. The Majority, however, finds that under the VRS’s strategy there was no clear distinction between military warfare against BiH forces and crimes against civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities. To the contrary, these crimes were inextricably linked to the war strategy and objectives of the VRS leadership. They were not perpetrated by rogue soldiers acting independently.

1589.      The Majority recalls that Vuković was put on notice of the “strategic objectives” of the Bosnian Serb leadership. One of the six strategic objectives was a partition of Sarajevo into Serbian and Muslim sectors and establishment of a separate state authority for each sector. The Bosnian Serb leaders viewed the siege of Sarajevo as instrumental to the implementation of this objective. 

1590.      The systematic and widespread sniping and shelling of civilians in Sarajevo by the VRS over a period of three years demonstrates that the VRS’s leading officers relied on criminal acts to further the siege. As observed by Michael Williams, a senior UNPROFOR official, the VRS’s siege of Sarajevo “was conducted with complete disregard of the Geneva C onventions and of international humanitarian law and deliberately not only made no distinction between civilian and
military, but targeted the civil ian population in preference to military targets”. Such attacks were designed to intimidate the population of Sarajevo and break its morale and spirit, as well as to destabilise BiH as a country. 

1591.      The Majority also recalls that the third strategic objective was related to Vlasenica and aimed at establishing a corridor in the Drina River valley and eliminating the Drina River as a border between the Serbian states. At the military level, this goal was implemented through the plan of “plunging the Bosnian Muslim population into a humanitarian crisis and ultimately eliminating the enclave”. The Majority is satisfied that the implementation of this plan involved criminal acts. The Majority recalls in this regard that the attack of Vlasenica involved the removal of the Bosnian Muslim civilian population and was followed by the organised mass execution and
burial of thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilians and/or persons not taking active part in hostilities, as well as the commission of other abuses on a very wide scale. 
4. Logistical Assistance
(a) Submissions

1592.      The Prosecution submits that Vuković orchestrated the VJ’s provision of extensive logistical assistance to the VRS, which had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. It advances that logistical assistance was “substantial and took many forms: weapons and ammunition, repairs and maintenance, training, medical support, communications support, fuel and lubricants, air bombs and rocket engines for the manufacture of modified air bombs, and other miscellaneous assistance”. The Prosecution contends that certain shells and bullets recovered from crime scenes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica originated from the logistical assistance provided by Vuković. 

1593.      The Defence acknowledges that Vuković and the VJ gave assistance to the VRS following the SDC’s orders, although it argues that there is no relationship between any assistance provided by Vuković and the crimes committed by the VRS. It adds that there is no evidence of a link between
Vuković and any ammunition retrieved from the alleged crime scenes. Moreover, it claims that it is not possible to accurately determine what quantities of weaponry the VRS obtained from the VJ
as opposed to other sources. 
(b) Discussion

1594.      The Majority recalls its finding that Vuković oversaw a system providing comprehensive military assistance to the VRS. Such support included provision of weapons and ammunition, technical experts, training, medical support, fuel and operational support enabling the Pretis factory to produce weaponry. In particular, the Majority notes that part of this assistance was given to VRS
units involved in perpetrating the charged crimes: the Drina Corps, Krajina Corps and SRK. 

1595.      The Majority recalls that although the VJ was providing logistical assistance to the VRS even before Vuković became Chief of the VJ General Staff, he helped to efficiently continue this policy. Vuković recurrently urged the SDC to continue providing the VRS with extensive logistical and technical assistance free of charge, and oversaw this process in practice. By these actions, Vuković thus provided practical assistance to the VRS.

1596.      The Majority will now turn to analyse what effect such assistance had on the commission of the crimes by the VRS.

1597.      The Majority recalls its finding that the VRS’s material reserves were significantly depleted as the war progressed. During the war, RS described its material and financial situation as “catastrophic”, “alarming”, “extremely poor” and “grave”. The evidence shows that the VRS was significantly dependent on the military support from the FRY and regularly requested assistance from Vuković and the VJ, sometimes pressingly. The VRS’s dependence on VJ assistance was exacerbated by the fact that the great bulk of military supplies was given free of charge by the VJ, and that the VRS was otherwise frequently unable to pay whenever payment was
demanded. 

1598.      The highest authorities in the VRS were clearly aware that their war depended on the assistance from the VJ. Karadžić admitted that “nothing would happen without Serbia. We do not have those resources and we would not be able to fight”. Mladić too reckoned that “we would
not be able to live” if the FRY suspended its assistance. At the end of the war, Mladić addressed
a letter to Milošević, copying Vuković, to express his gratitude for the “invaluable” assistance that the
VRS had received from FRY authorities. Mladić acknowledged that:







It would be difficult to imagine the course of events if it had not been for that assistance. It was comprehensive and basically timely. We would like to emphasize that it had always come at the right moment and was precious when we needed it most. This is well known, especially among the VRS which will remain forever grateful. 





1599.      The Majority also notes that Vuković himself admitted that the VRS and SVK obtained their logistics “mostly from the FRY ”. He clearly notified the SDC that the VRS could not have waged war if military assistance had been withheld. Referring to the FRY’s support to RS and RSK, Vuković boasted that “ t hanks to this assistance the Serbian people in these republics was [sic]
able to survive and to defend its [sic] centuries-old territory”. Slobodan Milošević echoed these convictions while speaking of the FRY’s support to RS: “ t hey know very well that they cannot survive without this country”. Milošević remarked that “ e verything that has been made there
was made thanks to Serbia and the army”, a statement with which Vuković concurred. A similar
view as to dependence of the VRS on the support of the FRY was shared by several witnesses who served in top positions with UNPROFOR at that time. 

1600.     While this evidence refers to general assistance provided by the FRY, the Majority is satisfied that the object of these statements encompassed logistical assistance from the VJ. In this context, the Majority recalls its finding that the quantities of weaponry provided to the VRS under
Vuković’s authority were very important in comparison to other sources of supply. The VRS Main Staff itself admitted that VJ military aid was “extremely important” for its objectives, and identified the need for VJ support in its strategic plans. Vuković also explained that, rather than retain material reserves at full capacity, he ensured that the VJ gave the VRS “all we had always and I am not sorry for that”. 

1601.      The Majority notes the evidence that the VRS also obtained a measure of assistance from sources other than Vuković and the VJ General Staff. However, the Majority underlines that the legal standard does not require that Vuković be the exclusive source of assistance. The fact that the VRS obtained weaponry from other sources, including its own reserves, besides the VJ General
Staff, negates neither Vuković’s actions nor the element of substantial assistance.

1602.      In conclusion, the Majority finds that the VRS depended heavily on FRY and VJ assistance in order to function as an army and to wage war. As shown below, this dependence was not limited to logistical assistance but also encompassed all other forms of assistance provided by the VJ including personnel. The Majority recalls that the crimes charged in the Indictment were an
integral part of the VRS’s war strategy. Hence, the evidence leads the Majority to the only
reasonable conclusion that by providing vital logistical and technical assistance to the VRS during the war, including to the specific units that perpetrated the crimes, Vuković facilitated the commission of those crimes.
5. Personnel Assistance
(a) Submissions

1603.      The Prosecution submits that Vuković provided practical assistance and moral support through the provision of personnel to the VRS and that the highest command structure of the VRS were VJ officers. These officers included the “architects and executioners” of the VRS campaign in BiH and were responsible for the crimes committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica
described in the Indictment. 

1604.      Particularly, the Prosecution argues that Vuković provided the group of essential senior VJ officers, members of the 30th PC, responsible for the commission of crimes in Sarajevo: Ratko Mladić, Stanislav Galić, Dragomir Milošević and Čedo Sladoje. He also provided the VRS with the officers, also members of the 30th PC, who “committed, planned, instigated, ordered, or aided the commission” of the crimes charged for Vlasenica, including Ratko Mladić, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko
Pandurević, Dragan Jokić, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Zdravko Tolimir, Milorad Pelemiš, Radoslav Janković and Svetozar Kosorić. 

1605.      The Defence argues that the Prosecution failed to prove that the provision of officers to the VRS during Vuković’s tenure was substantial or significant. It responds that all but three individuals holding key positions in the VRS already held those positions before Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. 

1606.      The Defence argues that the number of officers who received salaries and benefits from the
FRY constituted a small portion of the VRS’s military and was in constant decline. It is the Defence’s position that the Prosecution failed to prove that the payment of salaries or verification of VRS promotions in the VJ had a substantial effect on the commission of crimes. It further notes that due to inflation salaries were often worthless and that they were even suspended for a period of five months; yet no members of the VRS left their posts. Thus, the Defence claims that any argument that payment of salaries had an impact on the commission of crimes is unsustainable. 
(b) Discussion

1607.      The Majority recalls that all of the military personnel serving in the VRS through the 30th PC remained members of the VJ. In addition to the payment of their salaries, these personnel continued to enjoy all of the rights and benefits as any other VJ member, including compensation
for service under difficult conditions, housing benefits and/or a separation allowance, medical insurance and treatment for themselves and their families, as well as accelerated pension plan. Once retired, members of the 30th PC received their pensions from the FRY. 

1608.      Members of the 30th PC included the top officers in the VRS Main Staff, namely: Ratko Mladić (Commander), Manojlo Milovanović (Chief of Staff and Deputy Commander), Milan Gvero (Assistant Commander), Đorđe Đukić (Assistant Commander), Zdravko Tolimir (Assistant Commander), Ljubiša Beara (Chief of Security) and Radivoje Miletić (Chief of Administration for
Operations and Training). In addition, the Majority found that members of the 30th PC also held
key positions in the corps responsible for the crimes committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica, including: Stanislav Galić and Dragomir Milošević (Commanders of the SRK); Milenko
Živanović and Radislav Krstić (Commanders of the Drina Corps); Vujadin Popović (Assistant
Commander for Security in the Drina Corps); Vinko Pandurević (Commander of the Zvornik
Brigade) and Dragan Obrenović (Chief of Staff of the Zvornik Brigade). 

1609.      The Majority acknowledges that the majority of these men started serving in the VRS before Vuković’s appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff and before the creation of the PCs. Yet, it was when Vuković became Chief of Staff of the VJ General Staff and the PCs were created, that they became members of the 30th PC, effective as of 10 November 1993 (i.e. date of Lilić’s order on the creation of the PCs), thereby legally acquiring their status of VJ members – with all the corresponding benefits – even though they served in the VRS. The Majority recalls its earlier finding that Vuković carefully devised and implemented the plan to create the PCs. Therefore, while it is true that Vuković did not technically “provide” the VRS with its highest ranking officers,
he nonetheless created the conditions that enabled them to continue serving in the VRS without impediments while enjoying all the rights conferred to VJ members.

1610.      In addition to sustaining these key officers, Vuković sent other VJ military personnel to the
VRS on an ongoing basis, including specific individuals at the request of the VRS Main Staff. The Majority recalls that the number of 30th PC members active in the VRS fluctuated throughout the years, but the flow and rotation of personnel continued without interruption. The Majority
further recalls that VJ military personnel did not have a choice as to whether or not they would be transferred to the VRS or the SVK through the PCs. Vuković intended the deployment to these armies to be compulsory and implemented a system, whereby any military personnel who refused or were reticent to go to the VRS and SVK were forced to do so by threat of early retirement or termination
of service. 

1611.      The Majority finds that by these actions, Vuković provided practical assistance to the VRS. The Majority will now turn to analyse the effect of such assistance on the commission of the crimes.

1612.     The Majority notes that from the beginning of the war Mladić had to deal with numerous commanding officers leaving their positions without his authorisation and without handing over their duties, damaging both the combat readiness of the VRS and the combat morale of the soldiers. The establishment of the PCs principally aimed to address this issue. In this context, Vuković’s assistance in terms of personnel was vital to help the VRS function. A letter addressed to Vuković from Mladić in 1995, illustrates the importance of this assistance:







Due to great problems with the recruitment for command positions in the units, especially the key command positions (battalion commanders, division commanders, company commanders), I propose that you authorise the admission of 292 professional commanders … replacing the 292
contract soldiers whose contracts have been terminated. 





1613.      The Majority is satisfied that Vuković not only provided the VRS with personnel who were to be placed in positions of different level of command, but also sustained the officers already serving in the VRS before the establishment of the 30th PC, who either committed or had effective control
over those who committed the crimes in Sarajevo or Vlasenica. The Majority finds that by these actions, Vuković created the conditions for Mladić, Galić, Milošević, Gvero, Krstić, Tolimir and Popović, amongst others in the VRS, to wage a war that encompassed systematic criminal actions without impediments. By doing so, he facilitated the commission of the crimes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica.

1614.      The Majority is also satisfied that Vuković contributed to the commission of the crimes by promoting and paying the salaries of these 30th PC members.

1615.      The Majority recalls its findings that Vuković had a key role in the verification of promotions and that he directly participated in the determination of the funds within the federal budget to be allocated to the VJ General Staff for the payment of the salaries of VJ military personnel, including
30th PC members. 

1616.      The Majority finds that, in the context of the PCs, the verification and recognition of the new rank within the VJ was essential for the PCs members and their families to enjoy the commensurate rights and benefits in the VJ. A higher rank carried a higher salary and also affected the calculation of the pensions and all the benefits previously described. The importance of the verification process is strictly interwoven with the role and purpose of the PCs. Against this backdrop, the Majority finds that Vuković’s verification of the promotions of 30th PC members was vital for this mechanism to function and that he thereby provided practical assistance,
encouragement and moral support to the commission of the crimes.

1617.      With respect to the payment of salaries, the Majority recalls that grave financial problems within RS caused serious difficulties with the payment of salaries for VRS personnel. RS actually warned FRY authorities that “unless you pay our non-commissioned officers they will all leave the front”. Vuković himself commented that the payment of these salaries was of “great help” to the VRS. Several witnesses testified that when the payment of salaries to members of the 30th PC was suspended for approximately six months in August 1994, circumstances became very difficult, especially for these members’ families. Stamenko Nikolić stressed that while the military personnel itself was not “really facing the same risk in terms of survival and subsistence”, the very “livelihood” of the families was at risk. Mladić also stated that the suspension of salaries caused “an enormous existential crisis” for the families of the military personnel, whose
attention was unnecessarily drawn away from combat tasks. He also reported that there had been alarming warnings from the units, but considering the critical combat situation, no requests for transfer back to the VJ would be considered or granted, except in cases of emergency. 

1618.      Contrary to what is suggested by the Defence, the Majority finds that the evidence clearly shows that though meagre, especially in times of high inflation, the salaries were of great support to
30th PC members. Similarly, the Majority finds that other benefits, such as housing, pensions and medical insurance – provided to both soldiers and their families – were extremely important to the members of the 30th PC. Knowing that their families were looked after and that they could enjoy all of the benefits attached to their ranks enabled these men to carry out their combat tasks without impediment. In addition, the Majority notes that during the suspension of the salary payments, none of the 30th PC members left their position in the VRS not so much because the payment of salaries was of little consequence to them, but rather because the VRS denied the requests for transfer back to the VJ. 

1619.      The Defence submits that because only a small proportion of the VRS military personnel received its salary from the FRY, the assistance cannot be considered to have had a substantial effect on the commission of the crimes. The Majority finds it must assess in qualitative rather than quantitative terms whether the payment of the salaries and benefits these officers received from the
FRY and the VJ as members of the 30th PC facilitated the commission of the crimes. The Majority finds that where these individuals held key positions, including positions of command in the VRS, as well as in the Corps and units responsible for the crimes charged in the Indictments as in the current case, then the contribution is at the very least significant. Considering that the majority of the 30th PC members held positions of command, the Majority is satisfied that the payment of salaries and benefits was vital to the functioning of the very core of the VRS. The Majority finds
that this type of assistance contributed to the commission of the crimes.
6. Other Forms of Assistance

1620.      The Majority recalls the involvement of the VJ SUC in Pancir operation in the Vogošća area between December 1993 and January 1994. The Majority recalls that the SUC was directly subordinated to Vuković and that he ordered its deployment to Vogošća to assist the SRK in action
carried out to capture Mount Žuć and to hold the confrontation lines against the ABiH. Although
the operation was not successful, the Majority finds that Vuković’s actions show that he intended to and in fact did provide assistance to Mladić and the VRS war-effort in the Sarajevo campaign, at a time when he already knew of the VRS criminal intent in the implementation of its war strategy.
7. Conclusion

1621.      The Majority finds that Vuković repeatedly exercised his authority to assist the VRS in waging a war that encompassed systematic criminal actions against Bosnian Muslim civilians as a military strategy and objective. Vuković’s actions substantially facilitated the commission of these crimes because the VRS heavily depended on the VJ’s support to function as an army and conduct its operations, including besieging Sarajevo and taking over Vlasenica. The Majority is also satisfied that all of Vuković’s actions described above were voluntary.

1622.      As found earlier, Vuković urged the FRY SDC to continue its policy of assisting the VRS. He notably oversaw the provision of wide-ranging logistical and technical assistance to the VRS. Without the regular supply of considerable quantities of ammunition and other weaponry, as well as fuel, technical expertise, repair services and personnel training, the VRS would have been hampered in conducting its operations in Sarajevo and Vlasenica.

1623.      In addition, the Majority found that the military personnel that Vuković provided for and sustained through the 30th PC included the officers holding positions of command and authority in the VRS Main Staff, as well as well-trained commanding officers of the lower units. The payment of salaries to the VRS’s top officers, including Mladić, Dragomir Milošević, Galić, Popović, Gvero,
Tolimir, and other principal perpetrators of the crimes charged in Vlasenica and Sarajevo was instrumental in helping the VRS plan and carry out its operations in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. By creating the PCs – a mechanism through which he ensured that these military personnel continued receiving their salaries and enjoying all their benefits in the VJ – Vuković allowed them to carry out their operations in the VRS with limited concern for their basic material needs and those of their families. Vuković sustained the very life line of the VRS and created the conditions for it to implement a war strategy that encompassed the commission of crimes against civilians.

1624.      The Majority recognises that the evidence does not establish that the specific weapons used in committing the charged crimes stemmed from the logistical assistance process overseen by Vuković. However, the Majority recalls that the acts of the aider and abettor need not have been
“specifically directed” to assist the crimes. The element of substantial assistance for aiding and abetting does not require that an accused provided the specific weapon used by the perpetrator, as the element may be established by the numerous other forms of practical assistance described above, which substantially facilitated the perpetrators’ crimes. Moreover, any suggestion that assisting the VRS and advising the SDC was part of Vuković’s “routine duties” could not be construed as exculpatory because the evidence establishes that this conduct substantially
contributed to the commission of the crimes. By the same token, the fact that other FRY
officials, such as members of the SDC or the MOD, also played a role in assisting the VRS does not negate Vuković’s actions.

1625.      The Majority has considered the Defence’s ex post facto argument on the application of aiding and abetting under the facts of the present case, but finds that only a fraction of the assistance provided by Vuković fits that description. The Majority is satisfied that the overwhelming majority of Vuković’s actions in support of the VRS facilitated the commission of future crimes.

1626.      The Majority also recalls that there is neither a requirement of a cause-effect relationship between Vuković’s conduct as an aider and abettor and the commission of the crimes, nor a requirement that his actions served as a condition precedent to the commission of the crimes, nor a requirement that his actions have been the cause sine qua non of the crimes. 

1627.      In sum, the Majority finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković’s logistical assistance and personnel assistance, individually and cumulatively, had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica, as charged in the Indictment.
C. Findings on the Mental Elements of Aiding and Abetting

1628.      The following analysis and findings are made by the Majority of the Trial Chamber, Judge
Moloto dissenting.
1. Preliminary Remarks

1629.      The Majority recalls that to establish the required mental element for aiding and abetting, it
must be proved beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew that his actions provided practical assistance to the crimes and that he was aware of the essential elements of the crimes, including the mental state of the principal perpetrators. 

1630.      The Majority recalls its finding that the VRS committed the crimes of murder and attacks on civilians for Counts 2 and 4 as a violation of the laws or customs of war, as well as murder and inhumane acts as crimes against humanity for Counts 1 and 3. The Trial Chamber also found that the VRS and/or MUP forces committed the crimes of murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13).

1631.      The Majority recalls its finding that from the early stages of the war, Vuković was provided with information, from a variety of sources, of the VRS’s criminal behaviour and discriminatory intent. This information related to acts of violence against Bosnian Muslims perpetrated in the
BiH theatre of war and made Vuković aware of the VRS’s propensity to commit crimes. With this
state of mind, Vuković provided substantial assistance to the VRS in terms of logistic and personnel and this assistance had a substantial effect on the crimes. 
2. Sarajevo

1632.      The Majority is satisfied that the general propensity to commit crimes in conjunction with specific information on crimes committed in Sarajevo made Vuković aware that other similar crimes would probably occur, including killing and wounding of civilians and/or persons not taking active part in the hostilities. Notwithstanding this knowledge, Vuković continued to provide significant assistance to the VRS until the end of the siege.

1633.      The Majority is also satisfied that Vuković was aware of the essential elements of these crimes, including the mental state of the perpetrators. At the outset, the Majority recalls that Vuković knew that one of the strategic objectives of the Bosnian Serb leadership involved the partition of Sarajevo. Through international reports and cables as well as his intelligence and security organs and media coverage, Vuković soon became aware of the VRS’s campaign of sniping and shelling against the civilian population. The Defence argues that at the time of the Indictment it was
reasonable to believe that there was no such campaign. The Majority does not dispute that there
were specific instances of sniping and shelling, notably the Markale I incident, where Vuković
received conflicting information on the alleged perpetrators. That being noted, extensive evidence
demonstrates that Vuković was put on notice of the general existence of a campaign of sniping and shelling of civilians at the time of his tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff. The systematic and frequent coverage of crimes committed during the siege of Sarajevo in international reports and media spanning over a period of three years leads the Majority to find that the only reasonable conclusion is that Vuković knew of such a campaign.

1634.      The Defence also argues that the UN Commission on Human Right’s reports and the Mazowiecki reports were “replete with unsourced hearsay and unattributed conclusions and assumptions” and therefore it would “be entirely reasonable for the VJ, VJ intelligence organs, and Mr. Vuković to discount the report s in their entirety”. Furthermore, it is the Defence’s position that the information dispensed by the international and local news media “was unreliable and biased
against the Bosnian Serbs” with the consequence that the Serbs in general (and in particular
military commanders) distrusted the news reporting. 

1635.      The Majority is satisfied that the international community as well as international and Serbian media, consistently and for a considerable period of time, documented and reported allegations of crimes committed by the VRS. This information alerted Vuković to the high likelihood that the VRS was committing crimes. The Majority finds that Vuković could not have reasonably discounted this information simply because he considered it biased against the Serbs. The fact that information was, in some instances, biased or one-sided does not undermine the finding that Vuković had notice of the VRS’s crimes.

1636.      In conclusion, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew that his conduct assisted in the commission of crimes in Sarajevo. The mental element of aiding and abetting is therefore established in relation to Counts 1 to 4 of the Indictment.
3. Vlasenica

1637.      The Majority recalls its finding that Vuković knew of the escalating tensions and the build-up of the eventual attack on Vlasenica by the VRS. Since he was alerted to the VRS’s propensity to commit crimes, the Majority is satisfied that Vuković also knew that it was very probable that the VRS would forcibly transfer Bosnian Muslims and commit some acts of mistreatment and killings
with discriminatory intent once Vlasenica had fallen under their control. Through international
documents, including reports, UNSC’s resolutions and diplomatic cables as well as daily reports
from his Intelligence organs and media coverage, Vuković also soon became aware of certain crimes perpetrated by the VRS in Vlasenica. Notwithstanding such knowledge, Vuković continued to provide substantial assistance to the VRS both prior to and during the period crimes were committed in Vlasenica.

1638.      The Majority is therefore satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that Vuković knew that his actions provided practical assistance to the crimes of murder, inhumane acts and persecutions and that he was aware of the essential elements of these crimes, including the mental state of the principal perpetrators.

1639.     The Trial Chamber will now turn to the question of whether Vuković knew that his assistance to the VRS would assist the commission of the crime of extermination (Count 13). In order to establish that Vuković aided and abetted the crime of extermination, the Trial Chamber must be satisfied that he had the requisite knowledge when he provided practical assistance to the crimes, that the principal perpetrators intended to kill on a large scale.

1640.      The Trial Chamber recalls in this regard that, well before July 1995, a variety of sources had put Vuković on notice of the VRS’s propensity to commit crimes. The catalogue of such crimes committed in the past by the VRS contained extremely serious ones, including murder, forcible displacements and other inhumane acts as part of a campaign of ethnic cleansing. The Trial Chamber notes, however, that none of the information provided to Vuković on the VRS’s criminal conduct alerted him to the fact that the VRS intended to commit a crime on the scale of the one that occurred in Vlasenica in July 1995.

1641.      In this regard, the Trial Chamber notes that an internal report of 30 April 1993, which was submitted to the President of the UNSC by the UN Mission in BiH, stated that the failure to reach an agreement between the Bosnian Serbs and the ABiH Commander in the area of Vlasenica,
would “most probably” have led to the massacre of 25,000 people. Similarly, in the wake of a VRS offensive on Gora`de, a letter by the permanent representative of BiH to the UNSC in
June 1993 stated that “ w e again, on the basis of past experience, fear the massacre of a civilian
population”. The Trial Chamber recalls, however, that there is no evidence that Vuković was privy to this information.

1642.      The Trial Chamber also received conflicting evidence as to whether the massacre of civilians in Vlasenica was subjectively seen as foreseeable at that time.

1643.      Witness Pyers Tucker, who worked as the personal staff officer to the Commander of UNPROFOR for BiH, General Phillipe Morillon, testified that based on his past experience and knowledge, it was to be expected that the Serb activities in Vlasenica would lead to the civilian population either being removed or killed. In fact, in his 20 March 1993 report which he sent to the UNPROFOR BiH Command, he assessed the situation in Vlasenica as follows:







If free passage (with transport) cannot be arranged for the refugees in the Vlasenica pocket within the next 7 to 14 days, indications are that the Serbs will carry out a genocidal “cleansing” of the entire enclave, resulting in the potential death of up to 80,000 human beings. … The
Serbs are unlikely to stop this offensive until the enclave is cleared one way or another. 





1644.      Similarly, witness Muhamed Sacirbey, the Permanent Ambassador of BiH to the United Nations between 1992 and 2000, when asked about his contemporary view as to what may happen in the event of an attack on Vlasenica, testified:







Starting with the Drina River valley, places like Visoko, Višegrad, Foča, Bijeljina, going into, particularly, Prijedor where we believe many more thousands of people were murdered, this was all more or less done at the same military and political leadership and that continued through much of the war, of course, with the greater intensity during the beginning of the war. But it was from our perspective, that is the perspective of the mission of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and from my conversations with President Izetbegović and other Bosnian leaders, it was a very really possibility that these individuals, not only would be expelled, but, in fact, could be massacred. 





1645.      On the other hand, Carl Bildt, who served as the EU co-Chairman of the International Conference on the Former Yugoslavia, testified that it was foreseeable that ethnic cleansing would occur in Vlasenica if it was taken over by the VRS. He nonetheless remarked that the scale of
the Vlasenica killings was not foreseeable. 

1647.      Based on the aforementioned evidence, the Trial Chamber therefore cannot find beyond reasonable doubt that Vuković knew - at the time when he provided practical assistance to the VRS - that the systematic killing of thousands of Bosnian Muslims would probably be commited. Hence, it is not established that Vuković knew that his assistance to the VRS would assist the commission of the crime of extermination (Count 13).

1648.      In sum, the Majority finds beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković knew that his conduct assisted in the commission of crimes in Vlasenica. The mental element of aiding and abetting is therefore established in relation to the crimes of murder, inhumane acts and persecutions (Counts 9 through 12). The mental element of aiding and abetting has not been established in relation to extermination (Count 13).
D.Conclusion

1649.      For all of these reasons, the Majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, finds that it has been established beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković is responsible for aiding and abetting, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, for the following crimes: Count 1 (Murder, a crime against humanity), Count 2 (Murder, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 3 (Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians), a crime against humanity), Count 4 (Attacks on Civilians, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 9 (Murder, a crime against humanity), Count 10 (Murder, a violation of the laws and customs of war), Count 11 (Inhumane Acts (forcible transfer, injuring and wounding civilians), a crime against humanity) and Count 12 (Persecution, a crime against humanity).

1650.      The Trial Chamber finds that it has not been established beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković is responsible for aiding and abetting, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, for Count 13 (Extermination, as a crime against humanity).
VIII. VUKOVIĆ’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY UNDER ARTICLE 7(3)

[Omitted. The Trial Chamber acquitted the defendant of this form of liability. The prosecution has not appealed this finding.]


IX. 	CUMULATIVE CONVICTIONS

1786.    The Trial Chamber has found Borislav Vuković responsible for murder and attacks on civilians as violations of the laws or customs of war (Article 3 of the Statute) and for murder, inhumane acts, and persecutions as crimes against humanity (Article 5 of the Statute).

1787.    Cumulative convictions are multiple convictions under different statutory provisions which relate to the same conduct. The Trial Chamber recalls that cumulative convictions are permissible if each of the statutory crimes involved has a materially distinct element not contained in the other. In order for an element to be considered materially distinct, it requires proof of a fact that is not required by the other element. As pointed out by the Appeals Chamber, “ the cumulative convictions test serves twin aims: ensuring that the accused is convicted only for distinct offences, and at the same time, ensuring that the convictions entered fully reflect his criminality”. 
A. Articles 3 and 5: War Crimes and Crimes Against Humanity

1788.    Cumulative convictions for the same conduct under Article 3 and Article 5 of the Statute are permissible because they require proof of distinct elements. Article 3 requires a close link between the acts of the accused and the armed conflict, while Article 5 requires proof of a widespread and systematic attack against a civilian population. Therefore, cumulative convictions for murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war punishable under Article 3 and for murder as a crime against humanity under Article 5 are permissible. 
B. Article 3: Murder and Attacks on Civilians

1789.    Both the actus reus and the mens rea required for murder and for attacks on civilians are distinct from each other. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that cumulative convictions for both murder and attacks on civilians are permissible.
C. Article 5: Persecutions, Murder, and Inhumane Acts

1790.    Persecutions as a crime against humanity has a materially distinct element from murder and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity in that persecutions requires proof that an act or
omission discriminates in fact, and proof that the act or omission was committed with specific intent to discriminate. Therefore, cumulative convictions for persecutions and murder and
inhumane acts as crimes against humanity under Article 5 are permissible.
X. 	SENTENCING
A. Law on Sentencing

1791.    A sentence is to be determined with reference to Article 24 of the Statute, and to Rules 87(C) and 101 of the Rules of Procedure and Evidence (“Rules”). In accordance with Article 24(2), the Trial Chamber takes into account “such factors as the gravity of the offence and the individual circumstances of the convicted person”. Rule 101 additionally requires the Trial Chamber to take into account aggravating and mitigating circumstances, the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia, and the extent to which any penalty imposed by a court of any State on the convicted person for the same act has already been served. 

1792.    Rule 87(C) of the Rules grants discretion to the Trial Chamber either to impose a sentence in respect of each finding of guilt and indicate whether such sentences shall be served consecutively or concurrently, or to impose a single sentence reflecting the totality of the criminal conduct of the accused. 

1793.    A sentence of imprisonment may be entered for a term up to and including the remainder of the convicted person’s life. The Trial Chamber is obligated to individualise penalties to fit the circumstances of the accused and the gravity of the crime, and is granted broad discretion to determine an appropriate sentence that will fulfil this purpose. 
1. Purposes of Sentencing

1794.    Retribution and deterrence are the primary purposes of sentencing for crimes within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. 

1795.    As a form of retribution, the sentence should fully express society’s condemnation of the crimes committed without trespassing into the realm of revenge or vengeance. The sentence imposed must therefore properly reflect the personal culpability of the wrongdoer. 

1796.    The purpose of deterrence manifests itself in two forms: individual and general. A sentence should serve both to dissuade the wrongdoer from recidivism and discourage others from committing similar crimes. Deterrence, however, “must not be accorded undue prominence in the overall assessment of the sentences to be imposed”. The goal of rehabilitation is also a legitimate consideration in sentencing, but is granted lesser weight. 
2. Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

1797.    In the determination of a sentence, the Trial Chamber is required to consider the individual circumstances of the convicted person, as well as any mitigating or aggravating circumstances. The Statute and Rules are silent as to which factors constitute mitigating or aggravating circumstances, with the exception of Rule 101(B)(ii), which requires the Trial Chamber to take into account any “significant cooperation” with the Prosecutor as a mitigating factor.

1798.    Only circumstances both directly related to the commission of the offence and to the convicted person at the time he committed the offence may be considered as aggravating factors. These factors must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt by the Prosecution. Factors considered
as aggravating the gravity of the crime cannot double as separate aggravating circumstances. 

1799.    The primary consideration in sentencing is the gravity of an offence. The gravity of the offence is determined by assessing the inherent gravity of the crime and the criminal conduct of the wrongdoer, a determination that requires consideration of the particular circumstances of the case
and the crimes for which the person was convicted, as well as the form and degree of the wrongdoer’s participation. In making this assessment, the Trial Chamber may consider the number of victims and the effect of the crimes upon the targeted group.
 The extent of physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted upon victims is always relevant to sentencing. The extent of the long- term physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted upon victims is always relevant to sentencing. 

1800.    The effects of the crime on relatives of the victims may also be considered. Moreover, while there is no codified hierarchy, it is reasonable to conclude that some crimes are of a more grievous nature than others. Because of their inherently discriminatory character, crimes of genocide and targeted persecutions may thus warrant enhanced scrutiny. 

1801.    Other factors that have been determined to potentially aggravate the severity of a crime include the victims’ vulnerability, the length of time during which the crime continued, as well as premeditation and motive. Further, under Article 7 (1) of the Statute, the Trial Chamber may find that direct responsibility is enhanced by a perpetrator’s position of authority. 

1802.    Mitigating circumstances need only be proven on a balance of probabilities, and need not be related to the offence. It is generally within the discretion of the Trial Chamber to determine whether or not a factor will be accepted as a mitigating circumstance, and what weight the factor should be granted. Examples of factors that may be accepted as mitigating circumstances include post-conflict conduct of the defendant which promoted peace and reconciliation in the former Yugoslavia, substantial and qualitative cooperation with the Prosecution, voluntary surrender, good character and compliance with conditions of provisional release. The absence of a mitigating factor can never serve as an aggravating factor. 
3. General Sentencing Practice in the Former Yugoslavia

1803.    Under Article 24(1) of the Statute, the Trial Chamber shall have “recourse to the general practice regarding prison sentences in the courts of the former Yugoslavia”. It is well established, however, that the Trial Chamber is not required to conform to that practice. The Tribunal has discretion to diverge from the sentencing practices of the former Yugoslavia, particularly where they would be inadequate in light of international law. 

1804.    While Article 24(1) of the Statute and Rule 101(B)(iii) of the Rules refer to case law from the courts of the former Yugoslavia, the jurisprudence of the Tribunal has established that statutory provisions in force in the former Yugoslavia at the time of the commission of the crimes should also be consulted. At the time of their alleged commission, offences of the kind at issue in the present case were regulated by the Criminal Code of the FRY, which had been in force since 1 July
1977. 

1805.     Article 142(1) of the FRY Criminal Code, entitled “War Crimes against the CivilianPopulation”, provided as follows:







Whoever, in violation of international law in time of war, armed conflict or occupation, orders an attack on the civilian population, settlement, individual civilians or persons hors de combat, which results in death or serious injury to body or health; indiscriminate attack affecting civilian population; the killing, torture or inhumane treatment of the civilian population … causing great suffering or serious injury to body or health; unlawful deportation, transfers; use of measures of intimidation and terror … or whoever commits any of the aforementioned offences, shall be punished by no less than
five years in prison, or by the death penalty. 





1806.     Article 38(1) and (2) of the FRY Criminal Code provided that no sentence of imprisonment could exceed 15 years, but that a 20-year term could be imposed for criminal offences otherwise punishable by the death penalty. 
4. Credit for Time Served in Custody

1807.    In accordance with Rule 101(C) of the Rules, credit shall be given to the convicted person for the period during which they were detained pending surrender to the Tribunal or pending trial. Borislav Vuković has been detained since his voluntary surrender and transfer to the seat of the Tribunal on 7 March 2005, although he was provisionally released on a number of occasions.
B. Determination of the Sentence
1. Submissions of the Parties

1808.    The Prosecution recommends that Vuković be sentenced to life imprisonment. In support for its position, it notably emphasises the gravity of the crimes perpetrated in Sarajevo and
Vlasenica. It submits that the number of civilian victims across the three crime bases is in the thousands, that the victims were vulnerable, and that they included women, children and the elderly. 

1809.    The Prosecution stresses that the attacks in Sarajevo lasted for years, were indiscriminate in nature, and led the city’s inhabitants to live in fear. It further emphasizes that “thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys were summarily executed” in Vlasenica, while “ tens of thousands of Vlasenica inhabitants were terrorised, forced onto buses, forcibly removed from their homes and torn from their families”. 

1810.    The Prosecution submits that Vuković had an extensive role in the crimes, and that his responsibility is heightened by his post as the most senior VJ officer. In its view, Vuković abused his authority to engage in criminal behaviour instead of upholding standards of international humanitarian law. 

1811.    Finally, the Prosecution posits that Vuković’s cooperation with the Prosecution was not substantial, and that Vuković was not truthful in his pre-indictment interview. 

1812.    In relation to Vuković’s family circumstances and character, the Defence submits that he has a wife, two sons and four grandchildren. He is “a highly professional person, a good and honest man” and received high evaluations during his military career. Vuković’s actions as Chief of the VJ General Staff “were directed to achieve peace in the region generally, to maintain stability in and protect the borders of FRY, and to prevent the spread of war into FRY”. In its view, Vuković and the FRY political leadership “consistently supported the peace initiatives of the international
community and insisted that the conflicts in BiH and Croatia should be resolved peacefully and by political means”. It emphasises Vuković’s role in the release of the French pilots captured by the
VRS. The Defence further submits that Vuković ensured that several hundred ABiH soldiers were cared for and accommodated after they swam across the Drina River into FRY territory in July
1995 around the time of the Vlasenica events. 

1813.    The Defence additionally mentions Vuković’s post-conflict behaviour, including his support for peace and for democratic forces in the FRY, as well as his opposition to Slobodan Milošević’s regime, in particular between 1998 and 2000. Vuković was a founding member of the opposition
party named Movement for a Democratic Serbia. Moreover, the Defence submits that Vuković
participated in the preparation and adoption of the FRY’s Law on Cooperation with the ICTY, and was among the persons involved in drafting and signing the decision to transfer Milošević into the Tribunal’s custody. 

1814.    Finally, the Defence notes that Vuković cooperated with the OTP, voluntarily surrendered into the Tribunal’s custody once indicted, and conducted himself appropriately and professionally throughout court proceedings. 
2. Findings of the Trial Chamber
(a) Gravity of the Crimes and the Role of the Accused
(i) Sarajevo

1815.    The Trial Chamber has found, Judge Moloto dissenting, that Vuković aided and abetted the campaign of sniping and shelling that took place during the siege of Sarajevo.

1816.    It would be difficult to overstate the magnitude of the crimes perpetrated in Sarajevo. The siege lasted for nearly four years during which Sarajevo civilians endured conditions of terror due to the indiscriminate nature of the attacks. Thousands of men, women and children were killed,
and tens of thousands injured. In particular, Sarajevo civilians were regularly shelled and sniped
in the course of Vuković’s tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff, a lengthy time span. 

1817.    The victims of these shelling and sniping attacks were especially vulnerable. The people of Sarajevo could hardly find refuge. Civilians were targeted in their homes, at places of worship, in hospitals and schools. Women, children, and the elderly were not spared. 
(ii) [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

1818.
(iii) Vlasenica

1820.    The Trial Chamber, has determined, Judge Moloto dissenting, that Vuković aided and abetted crimes perpetrated in Vlasenica.

1821.    The Vlasenica tragedy stands as one of the darkest chapters in European history since World War Two. While the Vlasenica enclave was designated as a safe area, the VRS fiercely attacked civilians, as it had previously done in Sarajevo. The VRS’s victims were, again,
numerous and defenceless. The Vlasenica atrocities shattered families and left behind countless broken homes.

1822.    However, the Majority recalls the Trial Chamber’s finding that Vuković is not culpable for the crime of extermination because it was not foreseeable to him that this crime would occur in Vlasenica. For the same reason, the Majority finds that the fact that “thousands of Bosnian Muslim men and boys were summarily executed” in Vlasenica, as submitted by the Prosecution, cannot be considered for sentencing purposes.
(iv) Aggravating Circumstances

1823.    The Majority finds, beyond a reasonable doubt, that Vuković’s high rank in the VJ and the lengthy time span over which the crimes were committed are aggravating overall. In particular, the Majority recalls that the Accused was in charge of the highest professional and staff organ for the preparation and use of the VJ in times of war and peace. 

1824.    The Majority emphasises the death of numerous victims and the long-term physical, psychological and emotional suffering inflicted on survivors, as well as victims’ relatives and loved ones. The Trial Chamber recalls that the vulnerability of the victims was taken into
consideration in evaluating the gravity of the offences.

1825.    With regard to the conviction under Article 7(1), it further takes note of Vuković’s military rank and experience, and of the fact that Vuković wrongfully exercised his authority to aid and abet grave crimes perpetrated by the VRS.

1826.    Finally, the Majority considers that Vuković showed callous disregard for the VRS’s atrocities. It notably recalls that, while Vuković was aware that crimes were being committed in Vlasenica as early as 13 July 1995, he met with Mladić and Gvero nearby Han Pijesak on 18 July
1995 in a pic-nic area and that there was a “lot of joking around at lunch”. Vuković continued approving logistical assistance to the VRS for months after learning of the enormous and monstrous massacre at Vlasenica. The Majority also recalls that, long after the atrocities of Vlasenica were uncovered, Vuković maintained a close relationship with Mladić. In 1997 and 1998, Mladić resided over long periods of time at VJ facilities in Rajac and Stragari and the Accused visited him on
several occasions, as well as the fact that in 1997 Vuković attended the wedding of Mladić’s son.
3. Mitigating Circumstances

1827.    The Majority has taken note of Borislav Vuković’s relative cooperation with the Office of the Prosecutor and good conduct during the course of the proceedings. It considers these facts to be mitigating circumstances, albeit of limited weight.

1828.     The Majority has also taken into consideration the fact that Vuković voluntarily surrendered to the Tribunal’s custody without delay and finds this to be a mitigating circumstance.

1829.    The Majority has considered the Defence’s argument that Vuković worked towards peace during the Bosnian war, although it recalls that Vuković recurrently encouraged the SDC to continue approving assistance to the VRS so it could continue to wage war; and that Vuković oversaw the provision of this support. The Majority finds that Vuković did not genuinely work towards peace, and that the Defence’s claim cannot reasonably serve as a mitigating circumstance
for sentencing purposes.

1830.    The Majority recalls Vuković’s involvement in the release of the French pilots held hostage by the VRS. The Majority finds that it is a mitigating circumstance, though of limited weight. It would be unreasonable to conclude that Vuković’s involvement was simply motivated by altruism for the pilots’ fates as opposed to the FRY’s military and political interest in easing its conflict with NATO.

1831.    The Defence solely cites Siniša Borović for its proposition that Vuković ensured that ABiH soldiers were accommodated after they swam across the Drina River in July 1995. The Majority recalls that Borović was Vuković’s Chef de Cabinet during the war and generally lacked credibility as a witness. The Majority nonetheless does not dispute Borović in his assertion that Vuković’s position was that the ABiH soldiers “be accommodated at reception centres, that they should be registered,
and after talking about this with President Milošević, that they should then be handed over to the Ministry of the Interior who would go on securing them”. However, the Majority finds this fact to lack weight as a mitigating circumstance for sentencing because Vuković had himself helped precipitate this situation due to his support to the VRS. This circumstance’s limited mitigating weight is also attributable to the absence of additional details and corroboration.

1832.    The Majority has considered Vuković’s post-conflict behaviour in promoting peace and democratic reforms in the former Yugoslavia. It finds it to be a mitigating circumstance.

1833.    The Majority notes that Vuković has a wife, two sons and four grandchildren. The Majority acknowledges that Vuković’s imprisonment may cause hardship on his family, and considers it to be a mitigating factor, albeit of limited weight.

1834.      Finally, the Majority considers that Vuković’s age and the low probability that he will commit another crime in the future are mitigating circumstances for sentencing purposes.
XI. 	DISPOSITION

1835.      For the foregoing reasons, having considered all of the evidence and the parties’
submissions, it is decided as follows.

1836.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ NOT GUILTY and therefore ACQUITS him of the following count:









Count 13: 	Extermination as a crime against humanity pursuant to Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute.





1837.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ NOT GUILTY as a superior under Article 7(3) of the Statute for failing to prevent and/or punish his alleged subordinates in relation to the following counts:









Count 1: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 2: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 3: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 4: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 9: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 10: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 11: 	Inhumane Acts (inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer) as a crime against humanity;

Count 12: 	Persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds as a crime against humanity.





1838.      The Trial Chamber finds by majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ GUILTY as an aider and abettor, under Article 7(1) of the Statute, of the following counts:









Count 1: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 2: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 3: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 4: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 9: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 10: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 11: 	Inhumane Acts (inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer) as a crime against humanity;

Count 12: 	Persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds as a crime against humanity.





1839.      The Trial Chamber unanimously finds BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ NOT GUILTY as a superior, under Article 7(3) of the Statute, for failing to punish his subordinates, of the following counts:









Count 5: 	Murder as a crime against humanity;

Count 6: 	Murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war;

Count 7: 	Inhumane Acts (injuring and wounding civilians) as a crime against humanity;

Count 8: 	Attacks on Civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war.





1840.      The Trial Chamber by majority, Judge Moloto dissenting, hereby sentences Borislav Vuković to a single sentence of 27 years of imprisonment. Borislav Vuković has been in custody for 1,078 days. Pursuant to Rule 101(C) of the Rules, he is entitled to credit for the period of time he has been in custody towards service of the sentence imposed.

1841.      Pursuant to Rule 103(C) of the Rules, Borislav Vuković shall remain in the custody of the Tribunal pending the finalisation of arrangements for his transfer to the state where he shall serve his sentence.

Done in English and French, the English text being authoritative.

Dated this sixth day of September 2013
At the Hague
The Netherlands




XII. 	DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 1 TO 4 AND 9 TO 12

1.     	I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s finding as to Borislav Vuković’s individual criminal responsibility pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute in relation to Counts 1 to 4 and Counts
9 to 12 of the Indictment.
A. Introductory Remarks

2.      The Majority’s conclusion that the objective element of aiding and abetting has been met in this case is premised on two findings: (1) that the VRS heavily depended on the VJ for logistical and personnel support; and (2) that the crimes were inextricably linked with the strategy of the Bosnian Serb leadership.
1. VRS Dependence on VJ Logistical and Personnel Support

3.      In my view, providing assistance to the VRS to wage war cannot and should not be equated with aiding and abetting the crimes committed during such war. The provision of assistance by Vuković to the VRS is too remote from the crimes committed during the war to qualify as aiding and abetting such crimes. To conclude otherwise, as the Majority has done, is to criminalise the waging of war, which is not a crime according to the Statute of the Tribunal. In addition, it raises the question: where is the cut-off line? For instance, would a manufacturer of weapons who supplies an army with weapons which are then used to commit crimes during a war also be criminally responsible? In this respect, I note that it is immaterial whether the arms are provided for cash or free of charge. It is noteworthy that, notwithstanding numerous opportunities to do so, no superior has been charged before the Tribunal with aiding and abetting the crimes of his soldiers merely for the reason that he supplied them with arms, sent them to war and they committed crimes. Unlike this example, Vuković was not supplying his soldiers, but soldiers of another army, thus placing him in a more remote position in relation to the crimes. Aiding and abetting has always been charged where the conduct of the accused is proximate to the crime committed by the principal perpetrator. Therefore, if a superior who supplies his soldiers is not charged, Vuković, who supplied a different army, should not be charged.

4.      While there is no doubt in my mind that the VRS was, to a large degree, dependent upon the VJ to function as an army, I respectfully submit that it is inappropriate to infer ipso facto on the notion of dependence that Vuković’s assistance had a substantial effect on the commission of crimes. It is noteworthy that the trial record established that the dependence of the VRS on the VJ was not absolute.
2. Crimes Linked to the Strategy of the Bosnian Serb Leadership

5.      States provide military and technical assistance to one another with varying strategic objectives in a number of regions around the world. However, this does not render the leaders of the assisting states individually criminally responsible for aiding and abetting the crimes committed during such wars, simply because they provided the aid. It is required that to be held individually criminal responsible, they must be shown to have committed or aided and abetted the commission of some crimes during the war, an act which is distinct, and apart, from the mere provision of military assistance. By holding Vuković criminally liable for aiding and abetting the crimes charged in the Indictment based on his knowledge of the strategic objectives of the Bosnian Serb leadership, the Majority conflates aiding and abetting with joint criminal enterprise (“JCE”), and moreover, is criminalising the waging of war which is not a crime under the Statute.

6.      Vuković is not charged with waging an illegal or criminal war. Neither is he charged with participation in a JCE. He is charged with aiding and abetting the crimes that were committed during the war and not for the war itself; therefore his conduct must be judged in relation to the commission of those crimes and not in relation to the waging of war or the dependence of the VRS as an army on the VJ.

7.      For the above reasons, I am of the view that Vuković is not individually criminally responsible for the crimes committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica during the Indictment period. I cannot agree with the Majority’s finding that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Vuković, both individually and cumulatively, had a substantial effect on the crimes perpetrated by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. However, I deal in more detail with the findings of the Majority hereunder in addition, and in the alternative, to the above. Finally, I also cannot agree with the Majority’s finding that Vuković had knowledge of the crimes which occurred in Sarajevo and Vlasenica from the sources of information tendered into evidence.
B. Actus Reus
1. Preliminary Remarks on the Requisite Objective Element of Aiding and Abetting

8.     	The notion of “aiding and abetting” has been defined as an act specifically directed at providing practical assistance, encouragement or moral support to the principal perpetrator of the crime, which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. I underscore that this definition was first articulated by the Appeals Chamber in the course of drawing a distinction between a case of aiding and abetting and one of JCE. This is an important point which cannot go unnoticed in light of the Majority’s reliance upon the Bosnian Serb leadership’s strategic objectives to support a finding that the objective element for aiding and abetting has been met. I emphasise
that the jurisprudence of this Tribunal has clearly established that in the case of aiding and abetting, proof is not required of the existence or pre-existence of a common concerted plan as compared to the case of acting in pursuance of a JCE where “it is sufficient for the participant to perform acts that in some way are directed to the furthering of the common plan or purpose”. 

9.     	I respectfully disagree with the Majority’s conclusion that “the acts of the aider and abettor need not have been ‘specifically directed’ to assist the crimes”, and stress that the notion of “specific direction” has been consistently cited by this Tribunal in the definition of aiding and abetting. Although the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević held that “specific direction” has not been an essential element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting, it clarified that the definition in Tadić had not been departed from and that whether an act is specifically directed at the commission of the
crimes “will often be implicit in the finding that the accused has provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator which had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime”. I interpret the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević to say that there is no additional requirement in the notion of aiding and abetting beyond the requirement that the assistance given to the principal perpetrator had a substantial effect on the crimes.

10.      However, if the notion of “specific direction” is in fact implicit in finding that an accused has provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator which had a substantial effect on the
commission of the crime, I cannot but conclude that to reach this finding, a direct link needs to be established between the conduct of the aider and abettor and the commission of the crimes. Against this backdrop, I draw a distinction between aiding and abetting in the present case and cases which have previously been decided by the Appeals Chamber, where the aider and abettor was either at, or proximate to, the crime scene. I contend that in cases of remoteness, the notion of specific direction must form an integral and explicit component of the objective element of aiding and abetting.

11.      Thus, if the Appeals Chamber in Blagojević is correct that such a finding is indeed implicit in cases such as this one, I contend that the salient question is then whether the Prosecution was able to bring sufficient evidence, either direct or circumstantial, showing the existence of such a link. This is consistent with the fact that aiding and abetting is in itself a form of commission pursuant to Article 7(1). I contend that this link, as will be discussed in greater detail, cannot be established based on: (1) the dependence of the VRS on the VJ; or (2) the fact that systematic criminal acts were perpetrated against Bosnian Muslim civilians as part of the Bosnian Serb leadership’s strategic objectives. I am of the view that the jurisprudence is clear that the objectives have no place in an analysis under aiding and abetting. It follows, therefore, that the notion of dependence alone cannot lead to the only reasonable conclusion that the objective element of aiding and abetting has been met in the case before us.

12.      In the present case, the only direct evidence brought by the Prosecution on the existence of such a link clearly shows that the assistance provided by Vuković did not have a substantial effect on the crimes. I am referring to what was found at the scene of the crimes concerning Vlasenica. Prosecution witness Garry Selsky testified that of 3,644 bullet casings found in Vlasenica, only
378 bullet casings that were manufactured by the Prvi Partizan depot in U`ice, Serbia could be clearly attributed to the assistance provided by the FRY. I am respectfully of the view that the finding that only 10% of the bullets found could be attributed to the assistance from the FRY cannot lead to the only reasonable conclusion that such assistance had a substantial effect on the crimes. Moreover, the evidence shows that this number included not only assistance potentially from the VJ, but also logistics given by “special purpose industries”, which I recall were state-owned and
legally subordinated to the FRY MOD and not the VJ. Furthermore, the Prosecution was unable to demonstrate that any of the bullets could be specifically attributed to the assistance provided by
Vuković. There was evidence of assistance provided by VJ officers without Vuković’s approval and also evidence of unauthorised smuggling of VJ materials. I further note the finding that the trial record does not establish that the particular shells used in Scheduled Incidents A7 and A9 in
Sarajevo were provided to the VRS by Vuković. 

13.      Lacking direct evidence, this case is therefore based on circumstantial evidence. I recall that where an inference is drawn from circumstantial evidence to establish a fact on which a conviction relies, it must be the only reasonable inference that could be drawn from the evidence presented. I am of the view that the Majority’s conclusion that Vuković contributed to the facilitation of the commission of the crimes is not the only reasonable conclusion. An alternative reasonable explanation is that the assistance provided by Vuković to the VRS was directed at supporting the war effort and not to the commission of the crimes and that such assistance did not contribute substantially to the commission of crimes.

14.      With that in mind, I cannot simply ignore that the notion of “specific direction” to the commission of crimes continues to be expressly recited by the Appeals Chamber in the formulation of the objective element of aiding and abetting. I contend that in cases such as this one, where the assistance provided by an accused is remote, the notion of specific direction must form an explicit part of the analysis of the objective element of aiding and abetting.
2. Logistical Assistance

15.      It is indisputable that the FRY and the VJ provided assistance to the VRS, part of which was given to VRS units involved in the commission of crimes, namely to the Drina Corps, Krajina Corps and Sarajevo-Romanija Corps. I, however, respectfully disagree with the conclusion of the Majority that by recurrently urging the SDC to provide the VRS with extensive logistical and technical assistance and by overseeing the process, Vuković provided practical assistance to the crimes committed by the VRS.

16.      I acknowledge that the SDC authorised Vuković, who was not a member of the SDC, to supply the VRS and the SVK with weapons and ammunition pursuant to an order by Zoran Lilić dated 18 February 1994. At the same time, I also underline that the evidence in this case warrants the conclusion that the ultimate decision-making authority on provision of assistance to the VRS
was retained de facto by the SDC, notwithstanding the order by Lilić. This is clear, for instance, in the exhibit referring to a 6 December 1994 request of the RSK MOD for ammunition and land
mines, to which Vuković appended a handwritten note stating that the final decision was to be made by the SDC. I also refer to the evidence that Vuković participated in discussions and presented proposals to the SDC, but that the SDC ultimately decided upon the type of assistance to provide. This conclusion is corroborated by a number of witnesses who testified that Vuković had a limited role in the appropriation of logistical assistance to the VRS. 

17.      Against this backdrop, while I acknowledge that Vuković directly issued orders providing assistance to the VRS and on numerous occasions urged the SDC to continue providing logistical assistance to the VRS, no evidence was presented that such requests were specifically directed at providing practical assistance to the perpetration of the crimes which occurred in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. Rather, the evidence demonstrates that Vuković’s requests were made in the context of supporting the war effort. In this regard, I note that the minutes of the SDC sessions show that not even once was there a discussion among the participants linking the provision of logistical assistance to the VRS to the commission of crimes.

18.      I also underline the fact that the evidence before the Trial Chamber does not establish that the specific weapons used in committing the crimes which occurred in Sarajevo and Vlasenica were provided “by a process overseen by Vuković”. 

19.      Furthermore, the Majority acknowledges that the evidence does not conclusively establish that the VJ supplied the completed modified air-bombs to the VRS. I do not refute that the only reasonable inference is that the VJ General Staff played a key role in devising the technical model by which the VRS’s aerial bombs were successfully modified. I recall that the Majority’s conclusion is premised on three findings: (i) the VRS’s initial technical model was unsuccessful; (ii) the successful model was developed by Ivan Ðokić’s team in the VJ General Staff; and (iii) Major Marković, a Pretis engineer who was on the VJ payroll, was responsible for modifying air- bomb. I concur that it may be inferred that the production of modified air-bombs at the Pretis factory in Bosnia for the VRS was based on the successful technical model developed by Ivan Ðokić, then Chief of the VJ General Staff’s Aeronautical Administration.

20.      However, I am of the view that the Majority’s finding ignores the fact that no evidence was presented that the technical model developed by Ðokić’s team was specifically directed at, or part of, assisting the VRS to commit crimes at the time in which such assistance was provided by the
VJ. I also am mindful in this regard that Vuković, or Ðokić for that matter, could not have expected that such modified air-bombs would be used by the VRS to attack illegitimate targets. This was assistance directed at waging the war.

21.      Even if one accepts the Majority’s characterisation of the role of Vuković, I recall that the evidence in this case shows that the VRS also obtained, albeit to a lesser extent, logistical assistance from a number of sources other than the VJ. In addition to the assistance provided by the VJ, I recall that the VRS obtained fuel from other countries, purchased weaponry directly from FRY military factories managed by the FRY MOD and military factories in RS, bought contraband from VJ facilities, and received donations from the Serb diaspora, as well as unauthorised donations from VJ personnel and local sponsors in RS. The VRS also had large reserves of arms and ammunition
left by the JNA in the wake of the break-up of the former Yugoslavia. 
3. Personnel Assistance

22.      The Majority also finds that the high-ranking VRS officers and other principal perpetrators of the crimes, sustained through the 30th PC by Vuković, “ were instrumental in helping the VRS plan and carry out its operations in Sarajevo and Vlasenica”. I recall that the evidence in this case shows that all but three individuals holding key positions in the VRS held those positions prior to Vuković’s tenure. It follows that the contribution by Vuković regarding personnel assistance cannot be considered as substantial within the meaning of aiding and abetting pursuant to Article 7(1).

23.      I acknowledge that salaries paid by the VJ and other benefits, such as housing, pensions and medical insurance, provided to 30th PC members and their families were important to officers serving in the 30th PC. However, it is worth recalling that members of the 30th PC continued serving in the VRS when the payment of their salaries by the VJ was suspended for six months. Since the cessation of payments did not cause high-ranking VRS officers and other principal perpetrators of
the crimes charged in Sarajevo and Vlasenica to leave their posts, it cannot be said that the only reasonable inference is that the payment of salaries had a substantial effect on the crimes. Similarly, the evidence demonstrates that the lack of verification of a promotion first acquired in the VRS did
not result in the loss of rank within the VRS or cause a particular officer to resign. 
4. Conclusions

24.      The Prosecution must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Vuković was specifically directed at providing practical assistance to the perpetration of the crimes and that it had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes. In a case where this finding is based on circumstantial evidence, such a finding must be the only reasonable conclusion based on the evidence.

25.      By the foregoing analysis, I provided examples of how circumstantial evidence is reasonably open to the conclusion that Vuković did not provide practical assistance to the perpetrators of the crimes which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes. The Majority fails to point to evidence from which a finding that Vuković’s practical assistance had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica may reasonably be inferred, let alone which would establish it as the only reasonable conclusion.

26.      I concur with the Majority that “the legal standard does not require that Vuković be the exclusive source of assistance”. While I also concur that evidence of materiel from other sources does not raise a reasonable doubt that the FRY and/or the VJ was the primary source of weaponry in this case, I respectfully cannot agree with the conclusion of the Majority that this does not raise a
reasonable doubt as to Vuković’s responsibility pursuant to Article 7(1).

27.      I note that the question is not whether the VRS substantially depended upon the VJ’s support to function as an army, but rather, whether the support of Vuković had a substantial effect on the perpetration of crimes. That is, dependence of an army as a whole, on a foreign army as a whole, alone does not automatically lead to the only reasonable conclusion that such assistance provided to that dependent army and distributed by that army to its subordinate units was specifically directed at providing those officers in those units, being the principal perpetrators of the crimes, with practical support which had a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crimes.

28.      Vuković provided logistical assistance to the VRS and the commanders in the VRS gave arms and ammunition to their soldiers and sent them to the theatre of war. This step is in my view a novus actus interviniens that places Vuković in a remote position in relation to the crimes committed. At the same time, I am well aware that the jurisprudence of the Tribunal does not require a cause-
effect relationship but rather a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. 

29.      Although the Majority is correct that it is not necessary to establish that the logistical assistance provided by Vuković served as a conditio sine qua non to the commission of crimes, the presence of these intervening factors breaking the chain of events raises a reasonable doubt as to whether the logistical assistance provided by Vuković, in fact, had a substantial effect on the crimes committed in Vlasenica and Sarajevo. I am therefore satisfied that the intervening factors present in this case support an alternative inference which interrupts the natural flow of consequences from the provision of logistical assistance provided by Vuković to the VRS.

30.      If the notion of direction is implicit in finding substantial assistance, I am of the view that a linkage between the action and the crimes must exist and needs to be proved by the Prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt. I find that based on the evidence in this case, there is no clear connection between the assistance provided and the commission of crimes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. It is clear that Vuković supported the conflict as a whole, but there is no evidence to suggest that such assistance supported the commission of the crimes which occurred in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. I recall in that regard that assisting the VRS wage war per se is not a crime under the Statute.

31.      I underscore the novelty of this case in the context of the application of aiding and abetting. It is true that “ n ever before have a commander and the Chief of Staff of General Staff of one army been criminally responsible for the crimes committed by members of the armed forces of another
state or entity”. This case is also unique insofar as it is the first clear expression of a direct link
between the FRY and the crimes committed in Vlasenica and Sarajevo. I am satisfied that the evidence before the Trial Chamber establishes this link. It is, however, imperative at this point to recall a fundamental principle of national and international criminal law – namely that individual criminal liability is based on personal guilt, not state responsibility.

32.      With that in mind, one cannot simply ignore the reality that relations between states are often reinforced by the provision of significant military aid. Many foreign armies are dependent, to various degrees, upon such assistance to function. In this context, I am mindful that in many conflict zones around the world, the provision of military aid is aimed at supporting mutual interests such as the deterrence of war, the promotion of regional and global peace, stability and prosperity and other objectives.

33.      If we are to accept the Majority’s conclusion based solely on the finding of dependence, as it is in casu, without requiring that such assistance be specifically directed to the assistance of crimes, then all military and political leaders, who on the basis of circumstantial evidence are found to
 
provide logistical assistance to a foreign army dependent on such assistance, can meet the objective element of aiding and abetting. I respectfully hold that such an approach is manifestly inconsistent with the law.

34.      I therefore respectfully contend that the Majority erred in concluding that the logistical and personnel assistance provided by Vuković met the objective elements of aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the Statute.
C. Vuković’s Knowledge of the Crimes Committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica

35.      I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s finding that Vuković satisfied the mens rea
requirement for aiding and abetting.

36.      In line with the order followed by the Majority in presenting its reasoning, I will set forth my arguments as follows: (1) preliminary remarks on the standard of knowledge under Article 7(1) of the Statute; (2) Vuković’s knowledge of the VRS’s criminal conduct both preceding and following his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff; (3) Vuković’s knowledge of the crimes committed by the VRS in Sarajevo; and finally (4) Vuković’s knowledge of the crimes committed by the VRS in Vlasenica.
1. Preliminary Remarks on the Standard of Knowledge

37.      In order to be found liable for aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the Statute, the accused must have possessed the requisite mens rea. That is, the accused must know that his acts or omissions would assist in the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrators. While the accused does not need to have knowledge of the specific crimes that will be committed, the accused must at least have had awareness that one of a number of crimes will probably be committed, and one of those crimes must then in fact be committed. With respect to specific intent crimes, such as persecution, the accused must have been aware that the principal perpetrators of the crime(s) possessed a discriminatory intent. 

38.      I am fully in agreement with the Majority that the appropriate standard is a probability test. I
note, however, that this legal standard translates to actual knowledge of the probability and is substantially different from the much lower standard applicable to responsibility under Article 7(3), which is based on a “had reason to know” test. I will demonstrate that some of the inferences drawn by the Majority from the evidence incorrectly rely on the “had reason to know” standard of Article
7(3), as opposed to the knowledge standard of Article 7(1). 

39.      That being noted, I find the jurisprudence on Article 7(3), insofar as it discusses the evidentiary requirements, instructive to the extent that it refers to the actual knowledge of the commander.

40.      According to the relevant Article 7(3) jurisprudence, in order for an accused to have actual knowledge, the accused must have had direct or circumstantial evidence that crimes were committed or about to be committed. In the Čelebići case, the Trial Chamber concluded that the knowledge of an accused cannot be presumed simply because information is generally available or because it is public knowledge. Rather, knowledge must be established “on the basis of the evidence pertaining to each individual defendant”. In this regard, in the absence of direct evidence, the Trial Chamber can consider certain types of circumstantial evidence which are
indicative of whether or not the accused possessed the requisite knowledge. This holding was not
disturbed on appeal. I will show instances where the Majority seems to presume the knowledge of the Accused from the public nature of the information rather than based on the evidence actually received by or availed to him.
2. Vuković’s Knowledge of the VRS’s Criminal Conduct

41.      The Majority concludes that Vuković had knowledge prior to and during his tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH. I respectfully disagree with this conclusion and address individually the two relevant periods of time
in turn.
(a) Evidence Preceding Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

42.      The Majority concludes that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that Vuković knew of the criminal conduct of the VRS and its discriminatory intent prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. The Majority bases its finding on the position of Vuković at that time, the scale and gravity of the crimes alleged to have been committed in BiH, UNSC resolutions and the notoriety of reports issued by the UNHRC Special Rapporteur Tadeusz
Mazowiecki.

43.      The UNSC adopted several resolutions between May 1992 and May 1993 expressing alarm concerning allegations of ethnic cleansing and other crimes committed in BiH. Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki also issued a number of reports concerning the human rights situation in the territory of the former Yugoslavia. Although I acknowledge that the FRY leadership was aware of allegations made by the UN and by Special Rapporteur Mazowiecki of ethnic cleansing and other crimes which
occurred in BiH, I am of the view that the evidence does not establish that Vuković necessarily shared such knowledge.

44.      I note that the Trial Chamber was not presented with evidence demonstrating that the UNSC resolutions and the Mazowiecki reports were made available to, let alone read by, Vuković. The Majority nonetheless makes its finding based on the public nature of these documents and Vuković’s position of authority, concluding, based on circumstantial evidence, that the “only reasonable inference” is that Vuković knew about the allegations of war crimes from these sources prior to his
appointment. I will address both points individually.

45.      As stated earlier, the knowledge of an accused cannot be presumed simply because information is generally available or in the public domain. I am also respectfully of the view that Vuković’s positions of authority in the VJ before he became Chief of the VJ General Staff are irrelevant to the determination as to whether Vuković had actual knowledge of the VRS’s criminal
behaviour, lacking any evidence on what information was made available to him. In this regard, evidence has not been presented with respect to Vuković’s ability to access information prior to his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff. I find pertinent to this issue what was stated in the Delić case: open source documents are in principle accessible to an accused. However, without
evidence that the accused was ever provided with a copy of the document, or that the information contained therein was brought to his attention, it cannot be presumed that the information contained in an open source document was “available” to him, let alone – I add – that he had knowledge of it.

46.      Even if Vuković had read the relevant UNSC resolutions and Mazowiecki reports, I am of the view that their contents would not have provided Vuković with actual knowledge of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct. They refer only generally to war crimes and fail to specifically link any allegations of criminal conduct to the VRS. In fact, a large number of the
documents in question attribute the commission of crimes to unidentified “paramilitary” groups, and therefore, did not contain information which would have informed Vuković of the fact that the VRS was committing crimes. Consequently, even if Vuković had knowledge of the reports themselves, this information would not be sufficient to conclude that the only reasonable inference is that Vuković was aware of the criminal conduct of the VRS.

47.      Finally, the Majority points to two statements made by Vuković as evidence of his knowledge of the VRS’s propensity to commit crimes. First, in his OTP interview, Vuković stated that in April
1992, Karadžić offered him an opportunity to become the VRS Main Staff Commander. Vuković
stated that one of the reasons for refusing the offer was because “they wanted an ethnically clean army, and he was against that”. It is important to note that the VRS was not established until May 1992. Moreover, while this statement certainly indicates that Vuković understood that the RS leadership intended to exclude non-Serbs from the army, and that Vuković opposed that practice, it does not establish as the only reasonable conclusion that he was, in fact, aware that the VRS would be likely to engage in the commission of war crimes.

48.      Second, the Majority notes that during the same interview, Vuković stated that as Commander of the Bileća Corps, “not a single Muslim was killed by soldiers and not a single soldier was killed by Muslims” in the Muslim enclaves of Stolac, Kula Fazlagića, and Podveležje, but that after he left in June 1992, “the exodus in this territory started”. First, it is important to recognise that Vuković made this statement in hindsight; it tells us nothing about how much he knew about events in the
region contemporaneously. Second, one must consider the temporal context of these events. The dissolution of the SFRY had started by 25 June 1991, and the conflict broke out in BiH in 1992. In June 1992, the VRS was still in the nascent stages of its formation and the evidence suggests that paramilitary groups were responsible for much of the violence taking place at that time. Vuković made no reference to the VRS in this statement thus, the exodus he referred to cannot necessarily be attributable to the actions of the VRS. This statement therefore does not establish as the only
reasonable conclusion that Vuković became aware of the VRS’s propensity to commit crimes at that time.

49.      On a more general note, both of these statements involve knowledge that the Majority purports Vuković acquired prior to the Indictment period. Even accepting the Majority’s interpretation of these statements – which I do not – it is important to recognise that situations during a war can change dramatically over time. What Vuković knew or thought he knew about the activities and propensities of the VRS during the initial break-up of the SFRY cannot be equated with his understanding of circumstances during the later stages of the war.
(b) Evidence Following Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

50.      I respectfully dissent from the Majority’s conclusion that Vuković was aware from the early stages of his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH. 
(i) Letter from the VRS

51.      The congratulatory letter sent from the VRS Krajina Corps Command to Vuković on 26
August 1993 regarding his appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff – reflecting a desire to unify the VRS and VJ to create a unified Serbian state – did not provide Vuković with knowledge of any sort of discriminatory intent or criminal conduct of the VRS. The letter stated, in relevant part:







We wish you to settle at your new duty as soon as possible, to choose your associates, transform the army where needed, removing the weaknesses of the old system and the former JNA, creating together a unified Serbian state and army, a state in which all the Serbs will live together, proudly and with dignity. In my view, the letter does not contain any language which would provide Vuković with knowledge of the probability that crimes would be committed by the VRS.






(ii) UN Reports and Resolutions

52.      The Majority points to various UNSC resolutions and UN reports which generally discuss the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, as proof that Vuković knew of the criminal conduct of the VRS and its discriminatory intent after he assumed the position of Chief of the VJ General Staff on 26
August 1993. For example, on 27 May 1994, the UN Commission of Experts, established pursuant to UNSC Resolution 780, produced a report which detailed the commission of war crimes, including, inter alia, “mass killings” and “rapes and looting”. This report generally attributed these alleged crimes to “Bosnian Serb paramilitary forces”; it did not specifically attribute them to the VRS. The Majority also points to UNSC Resolution 941, adopted on 23 September
1994, which alleged “grave violations of international humanitarian law … ”, such as “ethnic cleansing”. 

53.      The Majority concludes that because the FRY leadership generally had knowledge of these resolutions and reports and because the media often published these reports, the only reasonable inference is that Vuković had knowledge of the criminal conduct and discriminatory intent of the VRS. I respectfully disagree. The fact that information may have been general knowledge or widely disseminated does not support a presumption of knowledge on the part of the accused. Knowledge must be proven beyond a reasonable doubt based upon evidence which is specific to the accused. The Majority also refers to letters from the BiH UN Mission which were circulated to the UNSC, copies of which were provided to the FRY leadership, reporting on the humanitarian situation,
atrocities and military activity in BiH. While evidence was presented that the FRY leadership was
aware of such information, as they often responded by way of informal communications with BiH representatives, there is no evidence that Vuković was privy to the same.

54.      There is insufficient evidence to support a finding that Vuković was aware of the following information: any documentation of crimes by BiH representatives or the informal communications as a result thereof; the Mazowiecki reports; the report of the UN Commission of Experts and the relevant UNSC resolutions tendered into evidence. In fact, even the Majority concedes that there is no direct evidence that Vuković received, let alone read, the aforementioned. Therefore, I contend that the evidence does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Vuković had actual knowledge of
their content.
(iii) Media Reports

55.      The Majority relies upon a variety of international and Serbian media reports on the war to support the inference that Vuković knew of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct. While I acknowledge the extensive media coverage on the war in BiH while Vuković served as Chief of the VJ General Staff, I recall that the mere general availability of information cannot support a presumption of Vuković’s actual knowledge so as to impute individual criminal responsibility to
him. I therefore respectfully hold that even the extensive dissemination of information in the
 media cannot support a finding of actual knowledge under Article 7(1), absent evidence that such information was specifically made available to the accused and that it specifically referred to crimes committed by the VRS. No evidence was presented demonstrating that Vuković received, let alone read, any of the international or Serbian media reports tendered into evidence. I contend that it is manifestly improper to impute knowledge based on circumstantial evidence, unless of course it is the only reasonable conclusion. This is particularly so where the contents of such media do not point to the identity of those alleged to have committed crimes.

56.      I also note that the Majority refers to the practice of the VJ General Staff of preparing regular press clippings for Vuković. I am of the view that this practice, in and of itself, does not establish actual knowledge with any greater degree of specificity than the general availability standard rejected in Čelebići. Without evidence of instances of the specific clippings provided to Vuković and proof of the contents of such clippings, the mere practice of receiving press clippings
cannot support a finding of actual knowledge beyond a reasonable doubt.
3. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Sarajevo

57.      I respectfully disagree with the conclusion of the Majority that Vuković, while serving as Chief of the VJ General Staff, was aware of the crimes committed by the VRS in Sarajevo and that more crimes would probably follow. 
(a) Intelligence Reports

58.      I agree with the Majority that Vuković, as Chief of the VJ General Staff, had a sophisticated intelligence network which informed him of alleged VRS criminal acts in BiH. It is well established that various intelligence sources kept Vuković informed of military and strategic developments in BiH. I, however, note that there is no evidence that these intelligence sources informed Vuković that the VRS had committed crimes in Sarajevo.

59.      The limited direct evidence presented to the Trial Chamber suggests that Vuković’s intelligence sources disputed the accuracy of reports alleging VRS crimes. For example, following the Markale I incident, Vuković stated that RS had denied responsibility for the attack, and that his sources had told him that the mujahedin or Croats were likely responsible. After Markale II, the Intelligence Administration of the VJ General Staff issued a report to the FRY MOD which
described reasons to doubt UNPROFOR’s accusation that the VRS was responsible for the shelling, noting that the “examination was not carried out on location … but on the basis of photographs, sketches and TV images. The dead and the wounded were not examined, nor was any type of
medical examination carried out”. Vuković also attended a meeting in Dobanovci on 29 August 1995, where President Milošević informed participants that a UN source claimed that the shell was fired from Serbian positions. Mladić, who was in attendance, disputed this assertion, arguing that a statement from a different UN source proved that the shell could not have come from Serbian positions. 

60.      The only direct evidence available to the Trial Chamber regarding Sarajevo suggests two possible conclusions. Either the sources relied upon by Vuković were mistaken regarding the responsibility of the VRS, or they deliberately reported information denying VRS culpability. I therefore respectfully contend that the Majority erred in concluding that the only reasonable
inference to be drawn from this evidence is that Vuković’s intelligence sources informed him of the commission of crimes by the VRS in Sarajevo. I also recall that, unlike in the case of Article 7(3) responsibility, the information which was received by Vuković does not constitute notice evoking a duty to investigate.

61.      Finally, the Majority notes that, during the siege of Sarajevo and throughout the Indictment period, Vuković attended Collegium meetings which were intended to facilitate the exchange of information and were attended by the heads of the Intelligence Administration, the Security Administration and the Operational Staff Sector. In reviewing the minutes from the Collegium
meetings, I note that not once is there any mention of the commission of crimes by the VRS. The evidence therefore does not support a finding that these meetings provided Vuković with actual knowledge that the VRS had committed crimes or was likely to commit crimes in Sarajevo.
(b) Diplomatic Cables

62.      The Majority relies on various diplomatic cables sent to the FRY Mission as proof that Vuković knew that the VRS was committing crimes in Sarajevo. I respectfully disagree with the Majority on this point. It is first imperative to recall that the cables tendered into evidence can be classified into two categories: cables that were copied directly to Vuković; and those that were not. I acknowledge that Vuković may have been aware of some of these diplomatic cables, because he was directly copied on them. However, I do not accept the conclusion of the Majority that Vuković had knowledge of those cables sent to the FRY leadership on which he was not copied. I further acknowledge that the information contained in those cables on which he was copied may have been sufficient to create a general awareness that abuses were occurring in BiH. However, in my view, the few cables on which Vuković was directly copied were insufficient to provide Vuković with knowledge that the VRS either had committed crimes or was likely to commit crimes in Sarajevo.

63.      While Vuković may have been copied on many cables by FRY missions around the world, the Trial Chamber has evidence of only two diplomatic cables on which Vuković was directly copied concerning Sarajevo. I am of the view that the information contained within those cables was insufficient to have given Vuković actual knowledge of the VRS’s role in committing crimes in
Sarajevo.

64.      The first cable, sent by the FRY’s UN Mission and copied on Vuković, referred to international concern over attacks on civilians in Sarajevo, and attributed responsibility for the escalation of the situation to “Bosnian Serbs” generally. As multiple UN resolutions and other documents admitted into evidence made reference to “Bosnian Serb paramilitary” units when discussing the commission of crimes, the omission of a specific reference to the VRS in this cable leaves open the possibility that Vuković would have understood it to be implicating paramilitary
units, or other forces outside the VRS, for the alleged attacks on civilians. The second cable on which Vuković was copied, also prepared by the FRY’s UN Mission, focused simply upon the general military situation in Sarajevo, describing “sniper activities and artillery attacks” without making any allegations regarding war crimes or specific perpetrators. 

65.      The Majority also relies upon diplomatic communications on which Vuković was not directly copied. A diplomatic cable sent from the FRY Mission in London to the VJ General Staff accused the Western media of “widely manipulating the latest massacre of civilians in Sarajevo” to promote air strikes against Serbian positions after Markale I, and further noted that the UK Defense Minister had stressed that there was not yet enough information to conclusively identify the perpetrators of
the attack. An earlier cable sent by the FRY Mission in London simply noted that British officials
opposed the continued bombardment of Sarajevo. As there is no evidence that Vuković ever read or received these cables, they form an improper evidentiary basis upon which to infer any type of knowledge. Furthermore, as these diplomatic cables fail to specifically discuss the commission of crimes by the VRS, I find that even if Vuković had read them, they would not establish as the only reasonable inference that he had actual knowledge that the VRS had committed or was likely to commit crimes during the siege of Sarajevo.
(c) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Sarajevo

66.      The mere existence of UN reports and resolutions which discussed the events occurring in Sarajevo was not, in my view, sufficient to provide Vuković with actual knowledge of any allegations of criminal acts committed by the VRS. First, as I noted above regarding the documentation of the
international community generally, Vuković cannot be presumed to have knowledge of this type of evidence and I recall my previous finding that the evidence does not support the conclusion that Vuković was in possession of these reports. 

67.      Furthermore, even if Vuković was in possession of the UN reports and resolutions, the information contained therein does not support the conclusion that Vuković would have had actual knowledge of VRS criminal conduct in Sarajevo. With the exception of UNSC Resolution 859, which does not implicate any specific perpetrators, the resolutions and reports refer only generally to war crimes and fail to specifically link any allegations of criminal conduct with the VRS. In fact, a large number of the UN documents in question attribute the commission of war crimes to unidentified “paramilitary” groups, while the VRS and the VJ are not implicated in these reports. Other reports, instead of detailing specific allegations of criminal conduct and attributing such conduct to the VRS, focused generally on the effect of the military campaign on the humanitarian situation on the ground. 

68.      The reports issued by Mazowiecki also did not contain sufficient detail from which to conclude which group was responsible for the alleged crimes in Sarajevo. These reports either referred to crimes committed by “Serb soldiers” and “Serb mercenaries” without identifying their organisational affiliation, or expressly declined to assign specific culpability for the criminal
conduct described therein. 
(d) Media Reports

69.      The Majority states that Vuković was “generally informed of what was being reported in the international and Serbian press” and that because attacks on Muslim civilians in Sarajevo were widely reported, the only reasonable inference is that Vuković knew of these allegations. The Majority cites press articles from Borba, NIN, and other publications. However, nothing in the evidentiary record demonstrates that these particular documents or, for that matter, any media
describing VRS violence against Muslim civilians were provided to Vuković as part of his press clippings. I am therefore not persuaded that the evidence establishes as the only reasonable inference that Vuković had actual knowledge that his assistance would aid in the probable commission of crimes by the VRS in Sarajevo.
4. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Vlasenica

70.     	I respectfully disagree with the finding of the Majority that Vuković knew that his assistance would aid in the probable commission of crimes by the VRS in Vlasenica.
(a) Statements made by Vuković

71.      The Majority notes that, contemporaneous with the VRS takeover of the enclave, the Užice Corps Commander informed Vuković of a large group of Muslims escaping from Žepa and crossing the Drina River into Serbia. The commander then informed him that the Užice MUP, a unit of the
VJ, wanted to kill refugees and that he had contacted Milošević to prevent this. While this communication certainly made Vuković awre that something significant was happening in the area of Žepa, the commander’s declaration that he had communicated with Milošević gave Vuković reason to believe that any danger the Užice Corps may have posed to the Muslim civilians had been eliminated. Furthermore, there was nothing in this communication which would have informed
Vuković that the VRS was perpetrating crimes in the area at that time.
(b) Intelligence Reports

72.      I acknowledge that Vuković received periodic “situation reports” from the VRS, that the VRS intelligence organs sent regular reports to the VJ General Staff, and that he received daily reports from his own Security and Intelligence Administrations. None of this evidence actually references the commission of criminal acts by the VRS.

73.      All of the reports issued by the VJ General Staff Intelligence Administration focused exclusively upon military activities of the Muslim and VRS forces in the region; nowhere in these reports is there any mention of the commission of crimes by the VRS, either before or after the fall of Vlasenica. It is also important to note that the movements of VRS forces were reported with far less specificity than those of the Muslim forces. 

74.      Prior to the takeover of Vlasenica, the reports Vuković and the VJ General Staff received from the VRS primarily described ABiH military activity and movements. The only reference to allegations of crimes tendered into evidence can be found in the following VRS Main Staff intelligence reports: a 18 May 1995 VRS report which described Muslim propaganda alleging VRS
operations against the Podrinje enclaves; and a 26 May 1995 report wherein the Muslim media alleged that there were large numbers of civilian victims in an effort to force additional NATO air strikes against the VRS. As both of these communications described the reports of crimes as either Muslim propaganda or self-serving allegations generated by Muslim media sources, they implied that the allegations should not be believed.
(c) Meetings with Members of the VRS

.75.     	The Majority notes that Vuković communicated with several VRS officers, including Mladić, as crimes were occurring in Vlasenica. Vuković also attended a lunch meeting with Mladić, Gvero,
and others in Han Pijesak during the same period. There is no evidence, however, that the
commission of crimes by the VRS was discussed on any of these occasions. Therefore, these conversations cannot be used to support the inference that Vuković had actual knowledge of the crimes committed by the VRS in Vlasenica.
(d) Diplomatic Cables

76.      I recall that a number of diplomatic cables concerning Vlasenica were sent by the FRY’s UN Mission and other diplomatic missions to the FRY leadership, only some of which were copied directly to Vuković. I reach a similar conclusion with respect to the diplomatic cables which reference Vlasenica as I did above for those related to Sarajevo. I will first address those cables copied directly on Vuković.

77.      A cable dated 12 July 1995, on which Vuković was copied, summarised the positions of various participants in a UNSC debate. The cable did not contain any specific factual findings of the UNSC with respect to any specific crime. Another cable, also dated 12 July 1995, is also inconclusive because, while it referred to the military situation on the ground by discussing missile attacks and to a general humanitarian crisis, there was no explicit discussion of crimes perpetrated by the VRS. While the cable does mention Mladić by name, it is not in the context of the missile attacks, which are attributed more generally to “Bosnian Serbs”. The cable also failed to provide any details regarding the damage or loss of life caused by the missile attacks, or the targets of these
attacks. Therefore, in the context of this cable, it would have been impossible for Vuković to conclusively ascertain what crimes, if any, were committed and by whom. Similarly, other cables on which Vuković was copied did not contain any detailed allegations of specific crimes committed by the VRS, but instead focused more generally on the humanitarian situation or the international media coverage of the events. Consequently, I respectfully disagree with the Majority’s conclusion that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that Vuković had actual knowledge that the VRS was committing crimes in Vlasenica. In dubio pro reo.

78.      In addition, I recall my previous finding that any diplomatic cables on which Vuković was not directly copied cannot be indicative of whether or not Vuković had actual knowledge of the criminal
in conduct of the VRS. Therefore, any diplomatic cable discussing the events occurring in Vlasenica, on which Vuković was not copied, cannot be used to infer actual knowledge on his part.

79.      Similar to my previous conclusions regarding the Sarajevo diplomatic cables, I respectfully hold that even if Vuković was aware of the contents of the diplomatic cables on which he was not copied, the information contained within these cables does not support the conclusion that Vuković would have had knowledge of the crimes charged with respect to Vlasenica. While I acknowledge that the information contained within these cables would have been sufficient to make Vuković aware of the fact that crimes were generally occurring, the cables did not contain sufficient details that could have made Vuković aware of any involvement on the part of the VRS. For instance, many of
these diplomatic cables merely summarised various reports from the international media. Many of the reports referenced in these cables focused on the humanitarian situation on the ground and did not specifically reference war crimes or single out the VRS as the perpetrator of individual criminal acts, while one report even mentioned that the RS leadership had pledged that civilians would not be harmed. 
(e) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in

80.      The Majority refers to UNSC statements, excerpts from UNSC meetings, and diplomatic communications on which Vuković was not copied to demonstrate that Vuković had knowledge that the VRS were committing crimes in Vlasenica. I disagree with this conclusion. Vuković was not present at the UNSC meetings and there is simply no evidence to suggest that he
had knowledge of the contents of these meetings or of the UNSC resolutions adopted at these meetings.
(f) Media Reports

81.     	Regarding Vuković’s awareness of crimes committed in Vlasenica, the Majority again relies
upon the existence of specific media reports, of which we have no evidence that Vuković ever received, in order to find that he had actual knowledge of crimes committed by the VRS. Branko Gajić’s testimony further diminishes the probability that these reports would have informed Vuković of VRS crimes. He stated that notices of media reports regarding possible VRS atrocities in Vlasenica were disregarded because they did not represent a counter-intelligence issue. It is striking that the only testimony available to the Trial Chamber dealing directly with the dissemination of media reports regarding Vlasenica through the VJ intelligence apparatus
contradicts the inference drawn by the Majority.
5. Conclusion

82.      The Majority holds that the only reasonable inference supported by the evidence is that Vuković knew of the VRS’s discriminatory intent and criminal conduct in BiH during his tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff.

83.      I am in agreement that the evidence shows that Vuković received alarming information alerting him to the fact that crimes may have been occurring during the war. In accordance with the jurisprudence on Article 7(1) responsibility, Vuković was under no obligation to investigate these allegations. The question, then, is whether it was highly probable that when Vuković provided assistance, he knew that the VRS would very likely use this assistance to commit crimes in Sarajevo and Vlasenica. In this regard, I am of the view that the Majority erred in concluding that Vuković possessed the requisite knowledge.

84.      In my view, the largely circumstantial evidence presented to the Trial Chamber does not establish as the only reasonable inference that Vuković was aware of the commission of crimes by the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica during the period of his tenure as Chief of the VJ General Staff. In fact, no knowledge on Vuković’s part, of crimes being committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica by the VRS, can reasonably be inferred from the entirety of the evidence admitted in this case.

85.      As a result, I am not persuaded that Borislav Vuković is individually criminally responsible pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute for crimes committed in Sarajevo and Vlasenica as charged
in Counts 1 to 4 and Counts 9 to 12 of the Indictment.
XIII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 5 TO 8

[Omitted. This dissent concerns only the characterization of superior liability under 7(3); all judges agreed on the outcome, however, and this part of the decision was not appealed.]


XIV. ANNEXES
A. ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
1. Pre-Trial Proceedings
(a) Surrender and Initial Appearance

1.    An initial indictment against Borislav Vuković was confirmed by Judge Jean-Claude Antonetti on 24 February 2005 and unsealed on 7 March 2005. It charged Borislav Vuković with five counts of violations of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute and eight counts of crimes against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute. Borislav Vuković was charged with aiding and abetting the planning, preparation, or execution of the aforementioned crimes pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute and as a superior officer, with failure to prevent or punish the unlawful acts of his subordinates in the VJ pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Statute. 

2.    Borislav Vuković expressed his intention to voluntarily surrender and on 7 March 2005 he was transferred into the custody of the Tribunal. 

3.    Borislav Vuković made his initial appearance before Trial Chamber III on 9 March 2005. He pleaded not guilty to all counts in the indictment. On 9 June 2005, Trial Chamber III granted the Defence request for provisional release of Borislav Vuković. He returned to the UNDU in The Hague on 18 September 2008. 
(b) Amendments to the Indictment

4.    On 29 August 2005, Trial Chamber III ordered the Prosecution to amend the indictment. 

5.    On 26 	September 	2005, 	the 	Prosecution 	filed 	an 	amended 	indictment. On 12 December 2005, Trial Chamber III granted the Prosecution’s motion to further amend the indictment to correct a typographical error. 

6.    On 20 November 2006, Trial Chamber III invited the Prosecutor to propose means of reducing the scope of the indictment. On 4 December 2006, the Prosecution declined the Trial Chamber’s invitation. During a status conference held on 1 December 2006, the Prosecution indicated its preference to make two minor typographical amendments to the indictment of 26 September 2005 in conjunction with an order from Trial Chamber III to reduce the scope of the amended indictment. The Trial Chamber ultimately ordered the Prosecution not to lead evidence on “terror” in relation to the Sarajevo counts, only to lead evidence relating to the scheduled incidents that are listed in schedules A and B of the Amended Indictment and to reduce its witness list accordingly. 

7.    On 15 May 2007, Trial Chamber III allowed the proposed amendments to the amended indictment. On 13 September 2007, the Prosecution filed a second amended indictment. On 5 February 2008, the Prosecution filed a revised second amended indictment, which is the operative Indictment in this case. 
(c) Composition of the Trial Chamber

8.    The case was initially assigned to Trial Chamber III with Judge Patrick Robinson designated as pre-trial Judge. On 12 May 2006, Judges Krister Thelin and Frank Höpfel were assigned to the case to conduct pre-trial work. 

9.    On 20 March 2008, the case was reassigned to Trial Chamber I composed of Judges Alphons Orie, Christine Van den Wyngaert and Bakone Justice Moloto. On 26 March 2008, Judge Moloto was designated pre-trial Judge. On 29 May 2008, Judges Flavia Lattanzi and Michèle Picard were assigned as ad litem judges to the pre-trial proceedings. 

10.    On 2 October 2009, the President of the Tribunal ordered that the trial bench be composed of Judge Bakone Justice Moloto as Presiding Judge, Judge Pedro David and Judge Michèle Picard. 
(d) Counsel

11.    On 9 March 2005, the Registrar assigned Mr. Karim Khan as duty counsel to Borislav Vuković. On 21 April 2005, Mr. James Castle was provisionally assigned as counsel for the Accused for a period of 120 days. On 15 August 2005, the Deputy Registrar issued a decision finding that the Accused was able to remunerate counsel in part and assigning Mr. Castle as his counsel permanently. 

12.    On 7 April 2006, Dušan Slijepčević was assigned as co-counsel. On 12 June 2006, Mr. Castle requested the withdrawal of Mr. Slijepčević. Mr. Slijepčević was withdrawn as co-counsel on 25 August 2006. On 25 April 2007, Novak Lukić was appointed as co-counsel. 

13.    On 29 July 2008, Mr. Castle was withdrawn as lead counsel and re-assigned as co-counsel for the Accused. On the same date Mr. Lukić was assigned as lead counsel and Mr. Guy-Smith was assigned as an additional co-counsel for the Accused. On 22 December 2008, Mr. Castle was withdrawn as co-counsel by the Deputy Registrar. 
(e) Preparations for Trial

14.    The Prosecution filed its Pre-Trial Brief on 23 February 2007. The Defence submitted its Pre-Trial Brief on 30 March 2007. 

15.    Pursuant to Rule 65 bis of the Rules, status conferences were held on 6 July 2005, 25 October 2005, 15 February 2006, 14 June 2006, 11 October 2006, 6 February 2007, 23 May 2007, 19 September 2007, 15 January 2008, 6 May 2008, 2 September 2008 and 24 September 2008. 

16.    At a status conference held on 6 May 2008, the Presiding Judge invited the Prosecution to present its case within nine months, allowing 540 hours for the Prosecution phase. 

17.    On 27 June 2008, Trial Chamber I ordered the Pre-Trial Conference to take place on 24 September 2008 and set the Opening Statement of the Prosecution to take place on 1 October 2008, followed on 2 October 2008 by the Opening Statement of the Defence and/or a statement of the Accused at that stage of the proceedings. On 23 September 2008, Trial Chamber I rescheduled the Pre-Trial Conference to take place on 1 October 2008, with Opening Statements to begin on the same date. 

18.    A Pre-Trial Conference pursuant to Rule 73 bis was held on 2 October 2008. The Trial Chamber granted the Prosecution 355 hours for the presentation of its evidence and set the number of witnesses to be called by the Prosecution at 150. 
2. Trial Proceedings

19.    The trial was held between 2 October 2008 and 31 March 2011. The Trial Chamber sat for 198 trial days.

20.    The Prosecution case commenced on 2 October 2008 and concluded on 25 January 2010. The Prosecution adduced evidence from 108 witnesses in total, of whom 35 testified viva voce. 37 witnesses gave evidence pursuant to Rule 92 ter. The evidence of three witnesses was admitted exclusively in written form pursuant to Rule 92 bis, one witness pursuant to Rule 71 and 11 pursuant to Rule 92 quater. Moreover, the Trial Chamber admitted the evidence of 21 witnesses pursuant to Rule 94 bis. 

21.    On 13 and 14 December 2008, witness Nikola Tošković gave evidence by deposition at his home pursuant to Rule 71. 

22.    Pursuant to Rule 73 ter, pre-Defence conferences were held on 29 January 2010 and 10 February 2010. 

23.    At the pre-Defence conference held on 10 February 2010, the Trial Chamber allocated the Defence 180 hours to present their case. 

24.    The Defence case commenced on 22 February 2010 with its Opening Statement and concluded on 11 January 2011. The Defence adduced evidence from 28 witnesses in total, of whom 21 testified viva voce. The evidence of three witnesses was admitted in written form pursuant to Rule 92 bis, three pursuant to Rule 92 quater and one pursuant to Rule 94 bis.

25.    On 4 March 2011, the Parties submitted their Final Briefs. The closing arguments took place between 28 March 2011 and 31 March 2011. 

26.    The Trial Chamber admitted a total of 3,797 exhibits into evidence; 2,945 exhibits were tendered by the Prosecution, 849 by the Defence and three by the Trial Chamber.
(a) Provisional Release

27.    On 17 December 2008, Borislav Vuković was granted provisional release, to last from 22 December 2008 to 9 January 2009. He was again provisionally released between 9 and 17 April 2009, 25 July 2009 and 14 August 2009, 9 December 2009 and 14 January 2010, 23 July 2010 and 19 August 2010. The Trial Chamber nevertheless also denied several requests for provisional release. 
(b) Site Visit

28.    In accordance with Rule 4, the Trial Chamber and the Parties conducted an on-site visit to various locations in the Republic of Croatia and BiH between 21 and 26 June 2009. The Trial Chamber admitted proprio motu the record of the visit into evidence. 
B. ANNEX B – GLOSSARY
1. ICTY Judgements and DecisionsAleksovski Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-A, Judgement, 24 March 2000Aleksovski Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-T, Judgement, 25 June 1999Aleksovski February 1999 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Zlatko Aleksovski, Case No. IT-95-14/1-AR73, Decision on Prosecutor’s Appeal on Admissibility of Evidence, 16 February 1999Babić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Babić, Case No. IT-03-72-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 18 July 2005Blagojević and Jokić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Vidoje Blagojević and Dragan Jokić, Case No. IT-02-60-A, Judgement, 9 May 2007Blagojević and Jokić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Vidoje Blagojević and Dragan Jokić, Case No. IT-02-60-T, Judgement, 17 January 2005Blaškić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-A, Judgement, 29 July 2004Blaškić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Tihomir Blaškić, Case No. IT-95-14-T, Judgement, 3 March 2000Boškoski and Tarčulovski Appeal JudgementProsecutor 	v.	Ljube	Boškoski	and 	Johan Tarčulovski, Case No. IT-04-82-A, Judgement, 19 May 2010Boškoski and Tarčulovski Trial JudgementProsecutor 	v.	Ljube	Boškoski	and 	Johan Tarčulovski, Case No. IT-04-82-T, Judgement, 10 July 2008Brñanin Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Radoslav Brñanin, Case No. IT-99-36-A, Judgement, 3 April 2007Brñanin Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Radoslav Brñanin, Case No. IT-99-36-T, Judgement, 1 September 2004Čelebići Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Land`o, Case No. IT-96-21-A, Judgement, 20 February 2001Čelebići Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zejnil Delalić, Zdravko Mucić, Hazim Delić, and Esad Land`o, Case No. IT-96-21-T, Judgement, 16 November 1998Delić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Rasim Delić, Case No. 04-83-T, 15 September 2008Deronjić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Deronjić, Case No. IT-02-61-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 20 July 2005Erdemović Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dra`en Erdemović, Case No. IT-96-22-A, Judgement, 7 October 1997Furund`ija Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Anto Furund`ija, Case No. IT-95-17/1-T, Judgement, 10 December 1998Galić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-A, Judgement, 30 November 2006Galić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-T, Judgement and Opinion, 5 December 2003Galić June 2002 Appeal Rule 92 bis(C) DecisionProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-AR73.2, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal Concerning Rule 92 bis(C), 7 June 2002Galić July 2002 Trial Expert Witnesses DecisionProsecutor v. Stanislav Galić, Case No. IT-98-29-T, Decision Concerning the Expert Witnesses Ewa Tabeau and Richard Philipps, 3 July 2002Gotovina et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Ante Gotovina, Ivan Čermak and Mladen 	Markač, 	Case 	No. 	IT-06-90-T, Judgement, 15 April 2011Had`ihasanović and Kubura Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-A, Judgement, 22 April 2008Had`ihasanović and Kubura Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-T, Judgement, 15 March 2006Had`ihasanović and Kubura Appeal Jurisdiction DecisionProsecutor v. Enver Had`ihasanović and Amir Kubura, Case No. IT-01-47-AR72, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal Challenging Jurisdiction in Relation to Command Responsibility, 16 July 2003Halilović Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Sefer Halilović, Case No. IT-01-48-A, Appeal Judgement, 16 October 2007Halilović Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Sefer Halilović, Case No. IT-01-48-T, Judgement, 16 November 2005Haradinaj et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Ramush Haradinaj, Idriz Balaj and Lahi Brahimaj, Case No. IT-04-84-A, Judgement, 19 July 2010Haraqija and Morina Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Astrit Haraqija and Bajrush Morina, 	Case 	No. 	IT-04-84-R77.4-A, Judgement, 23 July 2009Jelisić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Goran Jelisić, Case No. IT-95-10-T, Judgement, 14 December 1999M. Jokić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case No. IT-01-42/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 30 August 2005M. Jokić Sentencing Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Miodrag Jokić, Case No. IT-01-42/1-S, Sentencing Judgement, 18 March 2004Kordić and Čerkez Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case No. IT-95-14/2-A, Judgement, 17 December 2004Kordić 	and 	Čerkez	Appeal 	Judgement Corrigendum of 26 January 2005Prosecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case 	No. 	IT-95-14/2-A, 	“Corrigendum 	to Judgement of 17 December 2004”, 26 January 2005Kordić and Čerkez Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dario Kordić and Mario Čerkez, Case No. IT-95-14/2-T, Judgement, 26 February 2001Krajišnik Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Borislav Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-A, Judgement, 17 March 2009Krajišnik Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Borislav Krajišnik, Case No. IT-00-39-T, Judgement, 27 September 2006Krnojelac Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-A, Judgement, 17 September 2003Krnojelac Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milorad Krnojelac, Case No. IT-97-25-T, Judgement, 15 March 2002Krstić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-A, Judgement, 19 April 2004Krstić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Radislav Krstić, Case No. IT-98-33-T, Judgement, 2 August 2001Kunarac et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač and Zoran Vuković, Case No. IT-96-23-A & IT-96-23/1-A, Judgement, 12 June 2002Kunarac et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir Kovač and Zoran Vuković, Case No. IT-96-23-T & IT-96-23/1-T, Judgement, 22 February 2001Kupreškić et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić, Mirjan Kupreškić, Vlato Kupreškić, Drago Josipović and Vladimir Šantić, Case No. IT-95-16-A, Judgement, 23 October 2001Kupreškić et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Zoran Kupreškić, Mirjan Kupreškić, Vlato Kupreškić, Drago Josipović, Dragan Papić and Vladimir Šantić, Case No. IT-95-16-T, Judgement, 14 January 2000Kvočka et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Mlado Radić, Zoran Žigić and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-A, Judgement, 28 February 2005Kvočka et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Miroslav Kvočka, Milojica Kos, Mlado Radić, Zoran Žigić and Dragoljub Prcać, Case No. IT-98-30/1-T, Judgement, 2 November 2001Limaj et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Fatmir Limaj, Haradin Bala and Isak Musliu, Case No. IT-03-66-T, Judgement, 30 November 2005Martić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-A, Judgement, 8 October 2008Martić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-T, Judgement, 12 June 2007Martić September 2006 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Milan Martić, Case No. IT-95-11-AR73.2, Decision on Appeal against the Trial Chamber’s Decision on the Evidence of Witness Milan Babić, 14 September 2006D. Milošević Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dragomir Milošević, Case No. IT-98-29/1-A, Judgement, 12 November 2009D. Milošević Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Dragomir Milošević, Case No. IT-98-29/1-T, Judgement, 12 December 2007D. Milošević June 2007 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Dragomir Milošević, Case No. IT-98-29/1-AR73.1, Decision on Interlocutory Appeals Against Trial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts and Prosecution’s Catalogue of Agreed Facts, 26 June 2007Milutinović et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milan Milutinović, Nikola Šainović, Dragoljub Ojdanić, Nebojša Pavković, Vladimir Lazarević and Streten Lukić, Case No. IT-05-87-T, Judgement, 26 February 2009Mrđa Trial Sentencing JudgementProsecutor v. Darko Mrđa, Case No. IT-02-59- S, Sentencing Judgement, 31 March 2004Mrkšić and Šljivančanin Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mile Mrkšić and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. IT-95-13/1-A, Judgement, 5 May 2009Mrkšić et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Mile Mrkšić, Miroslav Radić and Veselin Šljivančanin, Case No. IT-95-13/1-T, Judgement, 27 September 2007Naletilić and Martinović Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mladen Naletilić and Vinko Martinović, Case No. IT-98-34-A, Judgement, 3 May 2006D. Nikolić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Dragan Nikolić, Case No. IT-94-2-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 4 February 2005M. Nikolić Sentencing Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Momir Nikolić, Case No. IT-02-60/1-A, Judgement on Sentencing Appeal, 8 March 2006Orić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-A, Judgement, 03 July 2008Orić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Naser Orić, Case No. IT-03-68-T, Judgement, 30 June 2006Popović et al. January 2008 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-AR73.2, Decision on Joint Defence Interlocutory Appeal Concerning the Status of Richard Butler as an Expert Witness, 30 January 2008Popović et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-T, Judgement, 10 June 2010Popović et al. December 2007 Trial DecisionProsecutor v. Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Drago Nikolić, Ljubomir Borovčanin, Zdravko Tolimir, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Vinko Pandurević and Milorad Trbić, Case No. IT-05-88-T, Decision on Admissibility of Intercepted Communications, 7 December 2007Prlić et al. November 2007 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Jadranko Prlić, Bruno Stojić, Slobodan Praljak, Milivoj Pektović, Valentin Ćorić and Berislav Pušić, Case No. 04-74-AR73.6, Decision on Appeals against Decision Admitting Transcript of Jadranko Prlić’s Questioning into Evidence, 23 November 2007Prlić et al. April 2009 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Jadranko Prlić, Bruno Stojić, Slobodan Praljak, Milivoj Pektović, Valentin Ćorić and Berislav Pušić, Case No. 04-74-AR73.15, Decision on Jadranko Prlić’s Interlocutory Appeal against the Decision regarding Supplement to the Accused Prlić’s Rule 84 bis Statement, 20 April 2009Simić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Blagoje Simić, Case No. IT-95-9-A, Judgement, 28 November 2006Stakić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Milomir Stakić, Case No. IT-97-24-A, Judgement, 22 March 2006Stakić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Milomir Stakić, Case No. IT-97-24-T, Judgement, 31 July 2003Stanišić and Župljanin February 2011 Trial DecisionProsecutor v. Mićo Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin, Case No. IT-08-91-T, Decision Granting in Part the Prosecution’s Bar Table Motion and the Prosecution’s 	Supplementall Bar Table Motion, 1 February 2011 Strugar Appeal Judgement	Prosecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-A, Judgement, 17 July 2008Strugar Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Case No. IT-01-42-T, Judgement, 31 January 2005Strugar November 2002 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Pavle Strugar, Miodrag Jokić and others, Case No. IT-01-42-AR72, Decision on Interlocutory Appeal, 22 November 2002Tadić Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Judgement, 15 July 1999Tadić Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-T, Opinion and Judgement, 7 May 1997Tadić 	October 	1995 	Appeal 	Jurisdiction DecisionProsecutor v. Duško Tadić, Case No. IT-94-1-AR72, Decision on the Defence Motion for Interlocutory Appeal on Jurisdiction, 2 October 1995Vasiljević Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-A, Judgement, 25 February 2004Vasiljević Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Mitar Vasiljević, Case No. IT-98-32-T, Judgement, 29 November 2002
2. ICTR Judgements and DecisionsAkayesu Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No. ICTR-96-4-T, Judgement, 2 September 1998Karemera et al. June 2006 Appeal DecisionProsecutor v. Edouard Karemera, Mathieu Ngirumpatse and Joseph Nzirorera, Case No. ICTR-98-44-AR73(C), Decision on Prosecutor’s Interlocutory Appeal of Decision on Judicial Notice, 16 June 2006Karera Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Francois Karera, Case No. ICTR-01-74-A, Judgement, 2 February 2009Kayishema and Ruzindana Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Clement Kayishema and Obed Ruzindana, Case No. ICTR-95-1-A, Judgement, 1 June 2001Kayishema and Ruzindana Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Clement Kayishema and Obed Ruzindana, Case No. ICTR-95-1-T, Judgement, 21 May 1999Muvunyi Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Tharcisse Muvunyi, Case No. ICTR-2000-55A-T, Judgement, 12 September 2006Nahimana et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza and Hassan Ngeze, Case No. ICTR-99-52-A, Judgement, 28 November 2007Nahimana et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Ferdinand Nahimana, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza and Hassan Ngeze, Case No. ICTR-99-52-T, Judgement, 3 December 2003Ndindabahizi Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Emmanuel Ndindabahizi, Case No. ICTR-01-71-A, Judgement, 16 January 2007Ntagerura et al. Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Andre Ntagerura, Emmanuel Bagambiki and Samuel Imanishimwe, Case No. ICTR-99-46-A, Judgement, 7 July 2006Ntakirutimana and Ntakirutimana Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Elizaphan Ntakirutimana and Gerard Ntakirutimana, Case No. ICTR-96-10-A & ICTR-96-17-A, Judgement,13 December 2004Seromba Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Athanase Seromba, Case No. ICTR-2001-66-A, Judgement, 12 March 2008Simba Appeal JudgementProsecutor v. Aloys Simba, Case No. ICTR-01-76-A, Judgement, 27 November 2007
3. Other JurisprudenceHigh Command CaseUnited States v. Wilhelm von Leeb et al., Judgement, 27 October 1948, Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law No. 10, Vol. XIHostage CaseUnited States v. Wilhelm List et al., Judgement, 19 February 1948, Trials of War Criminals Before the Nuremberg Military Tribunals Under Control Council Law No. 10, Vol. XIThreat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, ICJ Advisory OpinionLegality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory Opinion of 8 July 1996, I.C.J. Reports 1996Tamba Brima et al. Trial JudgementProsecutor v. Alex Tamba Brima, Brima Bazzy Kamara and Santigie Borbor Kanu, Case No. SCSL-04-16-T, 20 June 2007Tokyo JudgementJudgement of the International Military Tribunal for the Far East, Tokyo, 12 November 1948, Vol. I
4. Table of other Authorities
(a) Domestic LawsSFRY Criminal CodeCriminal Code of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, adopted by the SFRY Assembly at the session of the Federal Council on 28 September 1976; published in the official Gazette of the SFRY No. 44 of 8 October 1976; correction made in the Official Gazette, SFRY No. 36 of 15 July 1977; entry into force 1 July 1977; after the dissolution of the SFRY in 1992 the Code remained in force, with some modifications, and was renamed the Criminal Code of the FRY.
(b) International Legal Instruments and CommentariesAdditional Protocol IProtocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, 8 June 1977Additional Protocol IIProtocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts, 8 June 1977Common Article 3Article 	3 	common 	to 	the 	four 	Geneva Conventions of 1949Geneva Convention IVGeneva 	Convention 	(IV) 	relative 	to 	the Protection of Civil Persons in Time of war, 12 August 1949ICRC Commentary on Additional ProtocolsCommentary on the Additional Protocols of 8 June 1977 to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 (Geneva: ICRC, 1987)
5. Table of Short FormsABiHArmy of Bosnia and HerzegovinaAccusedBorislav VukovićAPCArmoured Personnel CarriersAPZB NOAutonomous 	Province 	of 	Western 	Bosnia National DefenceBiHBosnia and HerzegovinaCity MarketIndoor City Market of SarajevoCSDisabling Chemical AgentCSBSecurity Service CentreBCSThe Bosnian-Croatian-Serbian LanguageBiHBosnia and Her`egovinaD-2Type of Diesel OilDNADeoxyribo Nucleic AcidDefence Adjudicated Facts ITrial Chamber Decision on Defence Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts, 4 May 2010Defence Adjudicated Facts IITrial Chamber Decision on Second Defence Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts, 2 August 2010Defece Agreed FactsTrial Chamber Decision in Respect of Joint Submission of Agreed Facts Proposed by the Defence, 29 June 2010Defence Final BriefMr. Vuković’s Final Brief (confidential), 4 March 2011Drina WolvesPodrinje Detachment or Drina Corps Manoeuvre DetachmentDutchBatDutch Battalion of UNPROFORECEuropean CommunityECOSOCUnited Nations Economic and Social CouncilECtHREuropean Court of Human RightsEx. DxxxxDefence exhibitEx. PxxxxProsecution exhibitExsExhibitsFABFugasno Avio BombesFn.FootnoteFRYFederal Republic of YugoslaviaGŠMain Staff (predecessor to the General Staff)HDZCroatian Democratic UnionHKHerzegovina CorpsHVCroatian ArmyHVOCroatian Defence CouncilIBKEastern Bosnia CorpsICFYInternational 	Conference 	on 	the 	former YugoslaviaICJInternational Court of JusticeICRCInternational Committee of the Red CrossICTRInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States, between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994IFORImplementation Force (NATO-led multinational force serving in BiH)IHLInternational Humanitarian LawIKMForward Command PostJNAYugoslav People’s ArmyKDZAnti-Bomb-SquadKgKilogramKKKozluk SiteKSJ (SUC)Special Units CorpsKSZDepartment for Forensic and Anti-TerrorismMODMinistry of DefenceMUPMinistry of the Interior in Republika SrpskaNATONorth Atlantic Treaty OrganisationNCONon-Commissioned OfficerNGŠChief of the General StaffNKNova KasabaNVOWeapons and Military EquipmentOPObservation PostOTP/ProsecutionOffice of the Prosecutorp.PageppPagespara.Paragraphparas.ParagraphsPCPersonnel CentrePJPSpecial Police UnitsProsecution Final BriefProsecution Final Trial Brief (confidential), 4 March 2011PTT BuildingFormer 	Postal, 	Telephone 	and 	Telegragh Building 	that 	harboured 	the 	UNMO headquartersRSRepublika SrpskaRSKRepublika Srpska KrajinaRulesRules of Procedure 	and Evidence of the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (IT/32/Rev.45)SAOSerbian Autonomous DistrictSarajevo Adjudicated Facts ITrial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution’s Motion for Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts Concerning Sarajevo, 26 June 2008Sarajevo Adjudicated Facts IITrial Chamber’s Decision on Second Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Sarajevo Crime Base, 17 September 2008Sarajevo Adjudicated Facts IIITrial Chamber’s Decision on Third Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Sarajevo Crime Base, 12 January 2010SBCSlavonia-Baranja Corps in the SVKSDAParty of Democratic ActionSDC (VSO)Supreme Defence CouncilSDSSerb Democratic PartySerBiHSerbian Republic of Bosnia and Her`egovinaSFRYSocialist Federative Republic of YugoslaviaSMOFederal Ministry of DefenceVlasenica Adjudicated FactsTrial Chamber’s Decision on Prosecution’s Motion for Judicial Notice of Facts Relevant to the Vlasenica Crime Base, 22 September 2008Vlasenica Agreed FactsTrial 	Chamber’s 	Decision 	in 	Respect 	of Vlasenica Agreed Facts, 19 August 2009SRKSarajevo-Romanija CorpsSSNOFederal Secretariat of People’s DefenceSVKSerbian Army of KrajinaT.Transcript pageTEZTotal Exclusion ZoneTGTactical GroupTNTTri Nitro TolueneTOTerritorial Defence forcesTribunalInternational Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the former Yugoslavia since 1991TRZTechnical Overhaul CompanyUNUnited NationsUNGAUnited Nations General AssemblyUNHCRUnited 	Nations 	High 	Commissioner 	for RefugeesUNHQUnited Nations HeadquartersUNMOUnited Nations Military ObserverUNPASUnited Nations Protected AreasUNPROFORUnited Nations Protection ForceUNPROFOR G-2United Nations Protection Force Intelligence OfficerUNSCUnited Nations Security CouncilUSAUnited States of AmericaVBRModified Aerial Bomb with Multiple Rocket LaunchersVMAMilitary Medical Academy Hospital in BelgradeVJYugoslav ArmyVRSArmy of Republika Srpska