Trial judgment





UNITED NATIONS



IT-04-81-TD29246 - D2859707 January 2014



29246AJ







International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991



Case No.

Date:

Original:



IT-04-81-T

7 January 2014

English

IN TRIAL CHAMBER I

Before:Judge Bakone Justice Moloto, PresidingJudge Pedro DavidJudge Michèle PicardRegistrar:Mr. John Hocking

PROSECUTOR

v. BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ

JUDGEMENT

PUBLIC WITH CONFIDENTIAL ANNEX C

The Office of the Prosecutor:

Mark Harmon

Daniel Saxon

Counsel for the Accused:

Novak Lukić Gregor Guy-Smith








►I. INTRODUCTION





A. THE ACCUSED BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ

B. THE CASE AGAINST BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ

1. Alleged Crimes in Sarajevo (August 1993 - November 1995)

2. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

3. Alleged Crimes in Vlasenica (July 1995)

C. CONSIDERATIONS REGARDING THE EVIDENCE

1. General Evidentiary Principles

2. Specific Evidentiary Considerations

(a) Statements of the Accused

(b) Suspect Interview

(c) Evidence of Persons Convicted by the Tribunal

(d) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 92 bis, ter, quater

(i) Use of Rule 92 bis Statements

(ii) Use of Rule 92 ter Statements

(iii) Use of Rule 92 quater Statements

(e) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 71

(f) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 94 bis

(g) Use of Unscheduled Incidents

(h) Intercepted Communications

(i) Documents and Statements of Individuals Admitted Solely for Credibility Purposes and Not for the Truth of Their Content

(j) Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines

(k) Documents Admitted through the Bar Table

(l) Agreed Facts, Adjudicated Facts and Stipulations

(i) Agreed Facts and Stipulations

(ii) Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts

(m) Supreme Defence Council (“SDC”) Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

(n) VJ Collegium Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

(o) Mladić Notebook Excerpts




►II. APPLICABLE LAW





A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 3 OF THE STATUTE

1. Existence of an Armed Conflict and Nexus Between the Alleged Acts of the Perpetrator and the Armed Conflict

2. The Tadić Conditions.

3. Status of the Victims

B. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS OF ARTICLE 5 OF THE STATUTE

1. Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

C. ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS

1. Actus Reus

2. Mens Rea

D. MURDER

E. EXTERMINATION

F. OTHER INHUMANE ACTS

G. PERSECUTIONS

H. INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY

1. Responsibility Under Article 7(1) of the Statute – Aiding and Abetting

(a) Aiding and Abetting

(i) Actus Reus

(ii) Mens Rea

(iii) Omission

(iv) “Tacit Approval and Encouragement”

2. Responsibility Under Article 7(3) of the Statute – Superior Responsibility




►III. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF EVENTS IN CROATIA AND BIH BETWEEN 1990 AND 1995





A. CROATIA

B. BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA




►IV. POLITICAL ENTITIES AND STRUCTURE OF THE ARMIES





A. FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA

B. ORGANS OF THE FRY

1. The Supreme Defence Council

2. The FRY President

3. Chief of the VJ General Staff

4. Cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff

5. Structure of the VJ General Staff

(a) Collegium

6. Ministry of Defence

(a) Structure

(b) Functions of the MOD

(c) The Role of the MOD in the Military Budget

C. UNITS OF THE VJ

1. The Guards Brigade

2. The 72nd Special Brigade

D. MILITARY JUDICIAL SYSTEM IN THE FRY

1. Structure and jurisdiction

(a) Military courts

(b) Military disciplinary courts

2. The procedure for criminal and disciplinary violations

3. Jurisdiction over crimes committed abroad

E. STRUCTURE AND ORGANISATION OF THE ARMY OF REPUBLIKA SRPSKA (“VRS”)

1. Establishment of the VRS

2. Hierarchy in the VRS

(i) RS Supreme Command

(ii) Main Staff

a. Organisation

b. Decision Making Process

3. VRS Units

a. Drina Corps

b. Sarajevo-Romanija Corps (“SRK”

4. Judicial Military System




►V. FINDINGS ON THE CRIMES





A. SARAJEVO

1. The City of Sarajevo

2. The Siege Unfolds

(a) Basics of the Siege

(b) Chronology of the Siege

(c) Comparison of Forces During the Siege

3. Methods of Warfare

(a) Overview

(b) Shelling

(c) Sniping

4. Scheduled Shelling Incidents

(a) 22 January 1994 (Incident A1)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(b) 4 February 1994 (Incident A2)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(c) 5 February 1994 (Incident A3)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(d) 22 December 1994 (Incident A4)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The Flea Market in the Old Town of Sarajevo

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(e) 24 May 1995 (Incident A5)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(f) 24 May 1995 (Incident A6)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Investigation

(iv) Findings

(g) 18 June 1995 (Incident A7)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The Water Distribution Pump at the Simon Bolivar Elementary School in Dobrinja

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(h) 1 July 1995 (Incident A8)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Hrasnica

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Possible Military Targets

(vi) Findings

(i) 28 August 1995 (Incident A9)

(i) Indictment

(ii) The City Market

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

a. Introduction

b. UNMO Observation Post 1

c. UNMO and UNPROFOR Investigations

d. Local Police Investigations

e. Casualties

f. Follow up to Investigation

g. Expert Report

h. Allegations of Staged Incident

i. Investigation into Other Mortar Shell Impacts in the Same Area

(v) Findings

5. Scheduled Sniping Incidents

(a) 3 September 1993 (Incident B1)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(b) 2 November 1993 (Incident B2)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(c) 6 January 1994 (Incident B3)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(d) 19 June 1994 (Incident B4)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(e) 26 June 1994 (Incident B5)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Findings

(f) 22 July 1994 (Incident B6)

(ii) Incident

(iii) Findings

(g) 8 November 1994 (Incident B7)

(i) Indictment

(h) 23 November 1994 (Incident B8)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(i) 10 December 1994 (Incident B9)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

(iii) Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(j) 27 February 1995 (Incident B10)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Aftermath of the Incident

(iv) Investigation

(v) Findings

(k) 3 March 1995 (Incident B11)

(i) Indictment

(ii) Incident

(iii) Aftermath and Investigation

(iv) Findings

(l) 3 May 1995 (Incident B12)

(i) Indictment

6. Conclusion

7. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

8. Legal Findings

(a) Crimes under Article 3 of the Statute

(b) Offences under Article 5 of the Statute

B. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

C. VLASENICA

1. Vlasenica from 1992 to 6 July 1995

(a) Vlasenica in the Beginning of the War

(b) UN Intervention and “Safe Area” Designation

(c) Lead-up to the Military Offensive on Vlasenica

2. The Take-Over of Vlasenica

3. 11 July 1995: Refugees Flee to the Potočari Compound

4. The Establishment of Serb Authority over Vlasenica Municipality

5. Hotel Fontana Meetings

6. Transfer of Population

(a) Organisation of Buses

(b) Separation of Refugees 194

(c) Column of Military-Aged Men

7. Detention and Killings of Bosnian Muslim Men

(a) General

(b) Number of Missing Persons

8. Potočari Area (12–17 July 1995)

(a) “Opportunistic” Killings near the UN Compound

(b) Mass Execution near the Cinkara Zinc Factory

9. Bratunac Area (12-15 July 1995)

(a) General

(b) Meetings in Bratunac on 13 July 1995 Discussing the Execution of Prisoners

(c) Vuk Karad`ić School

(d) Jadar River (13 July 1995)

(e) Cerska Valley (13 July 1995)

(f) Nova Kasaba (13 July 1995)

(g) Glogova (17–27 July 1995)

(h) Kravica Market (13–14 July 1995)

(i) Kravica Warehouse (13–13 July 1995)

10. Zvornik Area

(a) Transfer from Bratunac to the Zvornik Municipality

(b) Orahovac (14 July 1995)

(c) Petkovci School and the Dam (14 July 1995)

(d) Pilica School (14–15 July 1995)

(e) Branjevo Military Farm (16 July 1995)

(f) Pilica Cultural Centre (16 July 1995)

(g) Kozluk (16 July 1995)

(h) Nezuk (19 July 1995)

(i) 18 July–1 November 1995

11. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

12. MUP Resubordination to the VRS

13. Legal Findings

(a) General Requirements under Article 3

(b) General Requirements under Article 5

(c) Murder

(d) Inhumane Acts (Article 5(i))

(i) Inflicting Serious Injuries and Wounding

(ii) Forcible Transfer

(e) Persecutions on Political, Racial or Religious Grounds

(i) Underlying Acts

a. Murder

b. Cruel and Inhumane Treatment

c. Forcible Transfer

(ii) Conclusion

(f) Extermination




►VI. INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY





A. PERSONNEL ASSISTANCE - 30TH AND 40TH PERSONNEL CENTRES

1. Events Leading up to the Formation of the Personnel Centres

2. Legal Documents Establishing the Personnel Centres

3. The Role of the 30th and the 40th PCs and their Secrecy

4. Appointment and Transfers to the VRS and SVK through the Personnel Centres

5. Appointment to SVK and VRS Positions and Temporary Transfers

6. VJ Officers who Refused to be Transferred to the VRS and SVK

7. Redeployment to the VJ

(a) Requests for Redeployment

(b) Vuković’s Role in the Redeployment of Personnel

(c) Final Findings

8. De Jure Status of Members of the Personnel Centres

(a) Promotions

(i) Law on Promotions

(ii) The Procedure of Verification

(iii) The Effect of the “Verification”

(iv) Role of Vuković in the “Verification” Process

(v) Final Findings

(b) Salaries

(c) Pensions

(d) Housing

(e) Medical Assistance

(f) Other Benefits

(g) FRY Citizenship

9. Termination of Service

(a) Law on Termination of Service

(i) Role of Vuković in the Termination of Service Process

(ii) Final Findings

10. Removal from Duty

11. Disbandment

B. VUKOVIĆ’S AUTHORITY OVER THE LOGISTICAL ASSISTANCE PROCESS

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Coordination and Meetings with VRS and SVK Officials

3. Establishment of a Procurement and Delivery Procedure

4. Supreme Defence Council Decisions on Logistical Assistance

5. Cooperation with the FRY Ministry of Defence and Influence Over FRY Military Factories

6. State Secrecy of Logistical Assistance

7. Conclusion

C. LOGISTICAL AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO THE VRS

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Delivery of Weaponry and Military Equipment to the VRS

(a) Analysis of Military Material Delivery Forms

(b) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1993 and August 1994

(c) Deliveries Conducted Between August 1994 and December 1995 during the Period of Sanctions Imposed by the FRY on Republika Srpska

3. The Koran Depot in Republika Srpska

4. The Pretis Military Factory in Republika Srpska

(a) Status of Pretis as a Company

(b) Relationship between the VJ and Pretis

(i) Presence of the Accused at Pretis in January 1994

(ii) Involvement of the VJ in Pretis’ Production

(iii) Importation of Raw Materials and Components from the FRY

(c) Supply of Weapons Produced by Pretis to the VRS

5. Provision of Modified Air-Bombs

6. Provision of Fuel

7. Lack of Payment for Military Supplies

8. Military Training of VRS Troops

9. Other Sources of Logistics

(a) Supplies and Training from Other Countries

(b) Weaponry Purchased Directly from FRY Military Factories

(c) Ammunition Reserves in Republika Srpska

(d) Fuel Reserves in Republika Srpska

(e) Military Factories in Republika Srpska

(f) Local Sponsors in Republika Srpska

(g) Unauthorised Donations of Weaponry by VJ Personnel

(h) Smuggling

(i) Conclusion

10. Conclusions on Logistical and Technical Assistance to the VRS

D. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

E. THE DEFENCE’S EXPERT WITNESS ON LOGISTICAL ASSISTANCE

1. Ðokić’s Background

2. Questionable Methodology of Expert Report

3. Use of Anonymous Sources



4. Claim that Vuković Had Limited Authority Over Logistical Assistance

5. Gross Underestimation of Logistical Assistance from VJ

6. Conclusion

F. EVIDENCE RECOVERED FROM THE ALLEGED CRIME SCENES

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Shells Recovered from Sarajevo Crime Scenes

3. Bullets Recovered from Vlasenica Crime Scenes

4. Conclusion

G. OTHER FORMS OF ASSISTANCE

1. Drina Plan

2. Gvozd Plan.

3. VJ Members Deployed to the RS

(a) Operation Pancir-2

(i) VJ Special Units Corps Deployment

(ii) Mount Žuć – 27 December 1993

(iii) Aftermath

(b) Secrecy of VJ Presence in the Area

(c) Vuković’s Presence in the Area

(d) SDC 18th Session of 7 February 1994

4. Other Instances of Direct Involvement of the VJ in BiH

5. Assistance in Communications and Electronic Data Transmissions

H. Vuković’S RELATIONSHIP WITH MLADIć

1. Personal Relationship between Vuković and Mladić

2. Vuković’s Support for Mladić’s Selection as Commander of the VRS Main Staff

3. Peace Plans.

4. Release of French Humanitarian Workers

5. UNPROFOR Hostages

6. Meeting between Vuković and Mladić in Bosnia on 18 July 1995

7. Release of the French Pilots by the VRS

8. Vuković’s Attendance at Darko Mladić’s Wedding in July 1997

9. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the Rajac Facility in July 1997

10. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the VJ Command Post in Stragari in the Autumn of 1997

11. Vuković’s Visit to Mladić at the Rajac Facility in February 1998

I. Vuković’S ACCESS TO INFORMATION

1. Background

2. Activities and Reports of Relevant VJ Organs

(a) Operations Centre

(b) Intelligence Administration

(c) Security Administration

(d) Information Administration

3. Information Flow between VJ, SVK and VRS

(a) Coordination Meetings

(b) Other Meetings

(c) Reporting

(i) Regular Operations Reports

(ii) Reporting during Operation “Pauk”

(iii) SVK and VRS Intelligence and Security Administrations’ Reports

(iv) Ad Hoc Reports and Communication Lines

(d) Conclusion

J. Vuković’S KNOWLEDGE OF THE CRIMES COMMITTED IN SARAJEVO AND VLASENICA

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Vuković’s Knowledge of the VRS’s Criminal Conduct

(a) Evidence Preceding Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

(b) Evidence Following Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

(i) Statements by Vuković

(ii) Information Received through the UN and Other Diplomatic Channels

(c) Conclusion

3. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Sarajevo

(a) Diplomatic Cables

(b) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Sarajevo

(c) Media Coverage of Crimes in Sarajevo

(d) Conclusion

(a) Vuković’s Knowledge of the Sensitivity of the Situation in and Around Vlasenica and the Eastern Enclaves

(b) Vuković’s Knowledge of Events in Vlasenica Before and During the Attack

(i) Intelligence Reports

(ii) Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Vlasenica

a. Statements by Vuković

b. Diplomatic Cables

c. Meetings with Members of the VRS

d. Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Vlasenica

e. Indictments of the Tribunal

f. Media Coverage of Crimes in Vlasenica

(c) Conclusion




►VII. VUKOVIĆ’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR AIDING AND ABETTING CRIMES UNDER ARTICLE 7(1)





A. ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

B. FINDINGS ON OBJECTIVE ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Preliminary Remarks

3. The VRS’s War Strategy Encompassed the Commission of Crimes

4. Logistical Assistance

(a) Submissions

(b) Discussion

5. Personnel Assistance

(a) Submissions

(b) Discussion

6. Other Forms of Assistance

7. Conclusion

C. FINDINGS ON THE MENTAL ELEMENTS OF AIDING AND ABETTING

1. Preliminary Remarks

2. Sarajevo

3. Vlasenica

D. CONCLUSION




VIII. VUKOVIĆ’S CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY UNDER ARTICLE 7(3)








►IX. CUMULATIVE CONVICTIONS





A. ARTICLES 3 AND 5: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY

B. ARTICLE 3: MURDER AND ATTACKS ON CIVILIANS

C. ARTICLE 5: PERSECUTIONS, MURDER, AND INHUMANE ACTS




►X. SENTENCING





A. LAW ON SENTENCING

1. Purposes of Sentencing

2. Aggravating and Mitigating Circumstances

3. General Sentencing Practice in the Former Yugoslavia

4. Credit for Time Served in Custody

B. DETERMINATION OF THE SENTENCE

1. Submissions of the Parties

2. Findings of the Trial Chamber

(a) Gravity of the Crimes and the Role of the Accused

(i) Sarajevo

(ii) [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]

(iii) Vlasenica

(iv) Aggravating Circumstances

3. Mitigating Circumstances




XI. DISPOSITION








►XII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 1 TO 4 AND 9 TO 12





A. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

1. VRS Dependence on VJ Logistical and Personnel Support

2. Crimes Linked to the Strategy of the Bosnian Serb Leadership

B. ACTUS REUS

1. Preliminary Remarks on the Requisite Objective Element of Aiding and Abetting

2. Logistical Assistance

3. Personnel Assistance

4. Conclusions

C. Vuković’S KNOWLEDGE OF THE CRIMES COMMITTED IN SARAJEVO AND VLASENICA

1. Preliminary Remarks on the Standard of Knowledge

2. Vuković’s Knowledge of the VRS’s Criminal Conduct

(a) Evidence Preceding Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

(b) Evidence Following Vuković’s Appointment as Chief of the VJ General Staff

(i) Letter from the VRS

(ii) UN Reports and Resolutions

(iii) Media Reports

3. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Sarajevo

(a) Intelligence Reports

(b) Diplomatic Cables

(c) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Sarajevo

(d) Media Reports

4. Vuković’s Knowledge of Crimes Committed by the VRS in Vlasenica

(a) Statements made by Vuković

(b) Intelligence Reports

(c) Meetings with Members of the VRS

(d) Diplomatic Cables

(e) Documentation by the International Community of Crimes in Vlasenica

(f) Media Reports

5. Conclusion




XIII. DISSENTING OPINION OF JUDGE MOLOTO ON COUNTS 5 TO 8








►XIV. ANNEXES





A. ANNEX A – PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

1. Pre-Trial Proceedings

(a) Surrender and Initial Appearance

(b) Amendments to the Indictment

(c) Composition of the Trial Chamber

(d) Counsel

(e) Preparations for Trial

2. Trial Proceedings

(a) Provisional Release

(b) Site Visit

B. ANNEX B – GLOSSARY

1. ICTY Judgements and Decisions

2. ICTR Judgements and Decisions

3. Other Jurisprudence

4. Table of other Authorities

(a) Domestic Laws 17

(b) International Legal Instruments and Commentaries

5. Table of Short Forms
I. INTRODUCTION
A. The Accused Borislav Vuković

1.    Borislav Vuković, son of Srećko, was born on 22 May 1944 in Koštunići, Serbia, in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
 ("SFRY"). After joining the Yugoslav People's Army ("JNA"), he graduated from the Ground Forces Military Academy in 1966. 

2.    When the conflict in the former Yugoslavia began, Vuković was Commander of the JNA Artillery School Centre in Zadar, Croatia. In January 1992,
 he was appointed the Commander of the newly established 13th Corps of the JNA in the Mostar region, Bosnia and Herzegovina ("BiH"). After the JNA's
 formal withdrawal from BiH in May 1992, Vuković became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army within the Yugoslav Army ("VJ") based
 in Niš, Serbia. 

3. On 26 August 1993, the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia ("FRY") appointed Vuković as Chief of the VJ General Staff, a position
 which made him the most senior officer in the VJ. He held this position until his mandatory retirement from the VJ in 2004, when he became advisor to
 the FRY government for "the rehabilitation of Serb victims of Albanian persecution" and chairman of the United Serbia Party. 
B. The Case Against Borislav Vuković

4.    An initial indictment against Vuković was confirmed on 24 February 2005 and unsealed on 7 March 2005. Vuković expressed his intention to voluntarily surrender and on 7 March 2005, he was transferred into the custody of the Tribunal. Amended indictments were filed on 26 September 2005, 13 September 2007 and 5 February 2008, the last being the operative indictment in this case
 ("Indictment"). 



5.    The Office of the Prosecutor ("Prosecution") charges Vuković with 13 counts of violations of the laws or customs of war and crimes against
 humanity, pursuant to Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute of the Tribunal ("Statute"), respectively.

6.    Pursuant to Article 7(1) of the Statute, Vuković is alleged to bear individual criminal responsibility for having aided and abetted in the
 planning, preparation, or execution of the crimes referred to in Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute. In particular, Vuković is alleged to have
 provided personnel and logistical assistance to the Army of the Republika Srpska ("VRS"), contributing substantially and materially to their capacity
 to commit crimes. 

7.    In addition, pursuant to Article 7(3) of the Statute, Vuković, as a superior, is alleged to bear individual criminal responsibility for having
 failed to prevent or punish the crimes committed by his subordinates as described in the Indictment. It is alleged that Vuković had a
 superior-subordinate relationship with former members of the JNA who joined the newly formed VRS and Army of the Serbian Krajina ("SVK") and who became
 officers in the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres ("PCs") of the VJ General Staff. 

8.    The Prosecution further alleges that Vuković created an environment of impunity in which his subordinates believed they could commit crimes
 without fear of sanction. The creation of this environment of impunity amounted to aiding and abetting by facilitating and encouraging the
 commission of the crimes alleged in the Indictment. 
1.Alleged Crimes in Sarajevo (August 1993 - November 1995)

9.    The Prosecution alleges that an extensive campaign of shelling and sniping took place in Sarajevo between August 1993 and November 1995, where
 civilians were specifically targeted or were subjected to reckless fire in areas where civilians were known to have been. The Prosecution contends
 that these crimes were, in part, "planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided" by members of the 30th PC of the VJ General Staff. 

10.    The Prosecution alleges that Vuković aided and abetted these crimes with the knowledge that the assistance he provided would be used in the
 commission thereof. It is further alleged that



Vuković had reason to know that members of the 30th PC participated in the perpetration of the said crimes, and that he failed to initiate an
 inquiry and to take the necessary and reasonable measures to prevent such acts or punish the perpetrators thereof. 

11.    Thus, in relation to crimes allegedly committed in Sarajevo between August 1993 and
 November 1995, Vuković is charged with individual criminal responsibility under Articles 7(1) and
 7(3) of the Statute for murder (Counts 1 and 2) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute and as a violation of the laws or
 customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute; for inhumane acts (Count 3) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute; and
 for attacks on civilians (Count 4) as a violation of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of
 the Statute. 
2. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


3. Alleged Crimes in Vlasenica (July 1995)

16.    The Prosecution alleges that on 8 March 1995, Radovan Karad`ić, as the Supreme Commander of the VRS, issued Operational Directive 7,
 instructing the VRS to eliminate the Muslim enclaves of Vlasenica and Žepa in furtherance of the "six strategic objectives" of
 12 May 1992. The Prosecution contends that between 6 and 11 July 1995, the Vlasenica enclave came under attack from the VRS and other Bosnian Serb
 forces under the command and control of Ratko Mladić. It is alleged that Vuković was aware of the planned attack, of the "six strategic
 objectives", and of the fact that some members of the VRS would engage in criminal conduct against the Bosnian Muslim civilian population; criminal
 conduct that would include persecution,
 forcible transfers and killings. 

17.    It is alleged that, between 12 July 1995 and about 20 July 1995, thousands of Bosnian Muslim men were captured by, or surrendered to, Bosnian Serb
 forces under the command and control of Mladić and were summarily executed between 13 and 19 July 1995 and buried in mass graves. The Prosecution
 contends that between 1 August 1995 and 1 November 1995, VRS units under the command of Mladić participated in an organised effort to conceal the
 killings by
 reburying bodies of Bosnian Muslim men killed in July 1995, exhumed from mass graves. 

18.    From July 1995 onwards, it is alleged that the VRS forcibly transferred thousands of
 Bosnian Muslim civilian women, children and elderly men from Potočari and other areas surrounding Vlasenica to Kladanj and other non-Serb areas of
 BiH. 



19.    The Prosecution alleges that these crimes were, in part, planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided by members of the 30th PC of the VJ. The Prosecution contends that Vuković aided and abetted these crimes with the knowledge that the assistance he provided would be used in the
 commission thereof. It is alleged that the said crimes were perpetrated with the intent to discriminate against the Bosnian Muslim population of
 Vlasenica on political, racial or religious grounds and that Vuković was aware of the perpetrators' discriminatory intent. 

20.    It is argued that Vuković had reason to know that his subordinates participated in the perpetration of crimes in Vlasenica and failed to
 initiate an inquiry and to take necessary and reasonable measures to prevent the alleged crimes or punish the perpetrators thereof. 

21.    Thus, in relation to crimes allegedly committed in Vlasenica in July 1995, Vuković is charged with individual criminal responsibility under
 Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute for murder (Counts 9 and 10) as a crime against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute and as a violation
 of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute. Vuković is further charged with individual criminal responsibility under
 Articles 7(1) and 7(3) of the Statute for inhumane acts (Count 11), for persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds (Count 12) and
 for extermination (Count 13) as crimes against humanity pursuant to Article 5 of the Statute. 
C. Considerations Regarding the Evidence
1. General Evidentiary Principles

22.    The Trial Chamber has received evidence both in oral and documentary form. This evidence was diverse in nature, ranging from direct evidence,
 circumstantial evidence, original and hearsay evidence, to facts agreed upon by the Parties or previously adjudicated before this Tribunal. The
 evidence also included written statements in lieu of oral testimony admitted pursuant to Rules 92 bis, 92 ter and 92 quater of the Rules of Procedure
 and Evidence of the Tribunal ("Rules").

23.    The Trial Chamber has duly considered and given appropriate weight to all the evidence adduced at trial in light of the entire trial record, in
 accordance with the Statute and the Rules even if not expressly referred to. The Trial Chamber underlines that the right of an accused to a reasoned opinion in writing, as set forth in Article 23(2) of the Statute and Rule 98 ter(C), in no way imposes an obligation to explain every detail of its
 assessment of the evidence adduced during the trial. 

24.    Article 21(3) of the Statute establishes that an accused shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty. The Prosecution bears the burden of
 proof for the guilt of the Accused and must establish beyond reasonable doubt each element of the crimes and of the modes of liability charged as well
 as any fact indispensable for conviction. Hence, in accordance with the principle in dubio pro reo, the Trial Chamber resolved any reasonable doubt
 as to the guilt of the Accused in his favour.

25.    At the start of the trial, the Trial Chamber issued "Guidelines" that governed the presentation and admission of evidence during the trial. 

26.    In its evaluation of viva voce witnesses, the Trial Chamber took into consideration the demeanour of a witness on the stand, as well as individual
 circumstances, including any protective measures granted. In assessing the viva voce witnesses, the Trial Chamber also considered the time that elapsed
 since the crimes alleged in the Indictment occurred and its possible impact on the accuracy of the testimony. Hence, the lack of precision, or the
 existence of minor discrepancies between a previous statement or testimony and the one given in this case, did not necessarily discredit the testimony.

27.    Hearsay evidence is evidence of facts not within the witness's own knowledge. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal allows admission of hearsay
 evidence pursuant to Rule 89(C). The weight to be attributed to that evidence depends on the circumstances. In particular, the Trial Chamber has
 taken into account the fact that the original source was not the subject of a solemn declaration or tested by cross-examination and that the
 reliability of such evidence could be flawed by a potential compounding of errors of perception and memory.

28.    Circumstantial evidence is evidence of circumstances surrounding an event from which a fact at issue may be reasonably inferred. Where an
 inference is drawn from circumstantial evidence to establish a fact on which a conviction relies, that inference must be the only reasonable one that could be drawn from the evidence
 presented. 

29.    The evidence of a single witness on a material fact does not, as a matter of law, require corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber has carefully
 analysed such evidence before relying upon it to a decisive extent.

30.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that evidence originating from the same source but at different times does not amount to corroboration. Likewise, it posits that a person giving the same narration more than once is not corroboration but mere proof of a good memory. The Trial Chamber
 recalls that there is no specific legal requirement as to the source of corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber is of the view that generally a person cannot corroborate his or her own testimony and has considered evidence originating
 from the same person but at different times to be reflective of the consistency of the witness's testimony and has accorded it appropriate weight.

31.    In assessing the authenticity of documentary evidence, the Trial Chamber considered various factors such as the source of the evidence, its chain
 of custody and other evidence relating to the document. In accordance with its Guidelines, the Trial Chamber did not consider unsigned or unstamped
 documents to be necessarily void of authenticity. When the Trial Chamber was satisfied of the authenticity of a particular document, it did not
 automatically accept the statements contained therein to be an accurate portrayal of the facts. Rather, the Trial Chamber evaluated all evidence
 within the context of the entire trial record.

32.    In evaluating the evidence adduced through witnesses in court, the Trial Chamber assessed whether the witnesses were reliable. In this light, the
 Trial Chamber notes that credibility is an essential element that needs to be satisfied in order for a witness to be found reliable. The Trial Chamber
 took into account any potential bias or partiality on the part of a witness.

33.    Some of the witnesses may have had close links with persons involved in the commission of crimes during the conflict in the former Yugoslavia and
 thus may have had a personal interest in being inaccurate in their testimony. In other cases, witnesses seemed to feel a sense of loyalty towards the Accused and were evasive in providing
 answers implicating the acts or omissions of Vuković. The Chamber has considered this factor when weighing and assessing their credibility. 

34.    Where witnesses were found to have displayed a lack of candour towards the Trial Chamber, their evidence was not relied upon. However, in cases
 where only part of the testimony was found to be unreliable, the Trial Chamber did not disregard the entire testimony but only rejected the portion it
 found to be unreliable.
2. Specific Evidentiary Considerations
(a) Statements of the Accused

35.    Article 21(4)(g) of the Statute provides that an accused shall not be compelled to testify against himself. In the present case, the Accused
 elected not to give evidence during the trial. In accordance with existing jurisprudence of this Tribunal, the Trial Chamber, in the determination of
 his guilt or innocence, has not drawn any inference from his silence.

36.    The Trial Chamber notes that the Accused gave an unsworn statement at the commencement of the trial on 3 October 2008, pursuant to Rule 84
 bis(A). The purpose of Rule 84 bis is to give an accused the opportunity to be heard by the Trial Chamber without having to appear as a witness. The Trial Chamber has the discretion to decide as to any probative value of statements given pursuant to Rule 84 bis. In this regard, the Trial
 Chamber has decided to attach limited weight to the Accused's Rule 84 bis statement.
(b) Suspect Interview

37.    On 9 March 2009, the Trial Chamber admitted into evidence the statement given by the
 Accused at the end of 2003 and early 2004, as well as his written response to questions asked by the
 Prosecution ("Suspect Interview"). In its Final Brief, the Defence "urges extreme caution in relying on any parts of the interview" on the grounds that the Accused was not able to review prior to this interview many of the documents later
 introduced at trial. The Defence further avers that the interview took place almost ten years after the events on which the Accused was questioned. The Trial Chamber is satisfied, however, that the procedural safeguards set out in Rules 42 and 43 were made available to the Accused during his
 interview with the Prosecution. Furthermore, the Trial
 Chamber notes that the Accused submitted his written response through his counsel, and that
 counsel was present during the interview. The Trial Chamber has thus awarded appropriate weight to the Suspect Interview in light of all the evidence
 on the trial record.
(c) Evidence of Persons Convicted by the Tribunal

38.    The Trial Chamber received testimony from several witnesses who have been the subject of criminal proceedings before this Tribunal, namely Momir
 Nikolić, Miroslav Deronjić, Milan Babić and Dra`en Erdemović. This testimony was received viva voce, as well as pursuant to Rules
 92 ter and 92 quater. Such evidence was examined by the Trial Chamber with great caution. This evidence has been considered throughout the Judgement accordingly.
(d) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 92 bis, ter, quater

39.    The Trial Chamber has received evidence adduced by both Parties pursuant to Rule 92 bis,
 92 ter and 92 quater. Transcript of Interview with Vuković, 23 January 2004; Ex. P812, Transcript of Interview with Vuković, 24 January 2004; Ex. P813, Transcript
 of Interview with Vuković, 24 January 2004; Ex. P814, Transcript of Interview with Vuković, 25 January 2004; Ex. P815, Transcript of
 Interview with Vuković, 25 January 2004; Ex. P816, Transcript of Interview with Vuković, 26 January 2004; Ex. P817, Transcript of Interview
 with Vuković, 27 January 2004.


(i) Use of Rule 92 bis Statements

40.    The Trial Chamber is guided by the Appeals Chamber holding in Galić, according to which "where the witness who made the statement is not
 called to give the accused an adequate and proper opportunity to challenge the statement and to question that witness, the evidence which the statement
 contains may lead to a conviction only if there is other evidence which corroborates the
 statement". 

41.    In its Final Brief, the Defence submits that 92 bis evidence must be accorded less weight than evidence admitted through viva voce witnesses who
 were available to answer questions in court. While there is no basis for assuming that as a general rule, Rule 92 bis evidence carries less weight
 than the viva voce evidence, in evaluating and weighing it, the Trial Chamber took into account the fact that the witnesses were not cross-examined.
 The Trial Chamber has awarded
 appropriate weight to 92 bis evidence in light of all the evidence on the trial record.
(ii) Use of Rule 92 ter Statements

42.    The Trial Chamber further recalls that Rule 92 ter allows for the admission of evidence that relates to the proof of the acts or conduct of the
 accused. The Trial Chamber admitted evidence in accordance with its Guidelines and the requirements of Rule 92 ter. The Trial Chamber took into
 account the fact that the witnesses were present in court and available for cross-examination, as
 well as the fact that the said transcripts or statements reflected the testimony that the witnesses would give if examined in court. The Trial Chamber
 considered such testimony in the same manner as it would consider other viva voce testimony.
(iii) Use of Rule 92 quater Statements

43.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that some of the evidence submitted by the
 Prosecution pursuant to Rule 92 quater should be found unreliable and disregarded as it was ultimately not corroborated by witnesses. 



44.    In this regard, the Trial Chamber recalls that Rule 92 quarter evidence, as a general rule, does not require corroboration. However, the
 jurisprudence of the Tribunal is clear that uncorroborated Rule 92 quater evidence cannot form the sole basis for a conviction. In all other
 circumstances, corroboration is simply one factor that the Trial Chamber, in its discretion, may consider when determining the weight to be given to
 such evidence. In addition, the Trial Chamber, in evaluating the weight of the evidence admitted pursuant to Rule 92 quater, carefully
 considered the fact that the evidence was admitted without the possibility of cross-examination. 
(e) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 71

45.    On 13 December 2008 a deposition was taken pursuant to Rule 71, pursuant to a decision by the Trial Chamber. 

46.    The Trial Chamber in evaluating this evidence considered that it was given during trial, it was taken in the presence of the Senior Legal Officer
 of Trial Chamber I, both Parties and representatives of the Registry and that the Defence had the possibility to cross-examine the person
 whose deposition was taken. Hence, Trial Chamber in assessing this evidence considered it in the
 same way that it considers evidence admitted in court.
(f) Evidence Pursuant to Rule 94 bis

47.    The Trial Chamber admitted the testimony and reports of several expert witnesses pursuant to Rule 94 bis. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal
 defines an expert as a person who by virtue of some specialised knowledge, skill or training can assist the Trial Chamber to understand or
 determine an issue. 



48.    In evaluating such evidence, the Trial Chamber took into account the totality of evidence admitted during the entire case. The Trial Chamber
 further considered factors such as professional competence of the expert, the material at his disposal, the methodology used, the credibility of the
 findings made in light of these factors and other evidence, the proximity of the expert to the party offering him or her as an expert, as well as
 whether the opposing party opposed some of the expert evidence and/or reports. 

49.    The Defence contends that the Trial Chamber should "place little to no weight on the conclusions, opinions and summaries" of experts Patrick
 Treanor and Robert Donia. It also challenges the report of Prosecution expert witness Morten Torkildsen. 

50.    As regards Treanor's report, the Defence recalls the Trial Chamber's concerns regarding the methodology used, as well as the criteria chosen in
 selecting the documents cited in his report. The Trial Chamber recalls that Treanor was extensively questioned by the Defence and the Trial Chamber between 3 November 2008 and 12 November 2008
 inter alia on his methodology and selection criteria. The Trial Chamber further recalls that in its decision admitting the expert report, the
 Majority held that: "although the Report does not explicitly state the methodology and criteria used for selecting documents, a certain methodology can
 nonetheless be inferred from it". When determining the weight to be given to the report, the Trial Chamber took into consideration the witness's
 testimony, particularly his cross-examination and the Defence's concerns. The Trial Chamber has given limited weight to the report and used it only
 to support findings related to the background of this case or when corroborated.

51.    As regards Donia's reports, the Defence repeats its concerns expressed during the trial phase regarding the lack of objectivity of the report and
 its lack of value to the Trial Chamber. The Trial Chamber recalls its finding that "the concerns advanced by the Defence concerning the fact that Dr.
 Donia's opinions and conclusions are mixed with factual summaries and that his Reports are
 'essentially the prosecution's version of what happened in Sarajevo and RS during the time alleged in the indictment' might have an impact on the weight given to such Reports". The Trial Chamber has taken the Defence's concerns into account
 when determining the weight to attribute to these reports and has given them limited weight, using them only for findings related to the background of
 this case or when corroborated.

52.    Similarly, the Defence repeats its concerns relating to the Torkildsen report. The Trial Chamber notes that these concerns were taken into
 consideration during the admission of the said report. The Trial Chamber has attributed limited weight to this expert report and only used it when
 corroborated.

53.    With respect to Defence expert witness Ivan Ðokić, the Trial Chamber defers its assessment of his credibility to a separate part of the
 Judgement. 
(g) Use of Unscheduled Incidents

54.    In its Final Brief, the Defence "maintains its standing objection to the use of unscheduled incidents" on the grounds that they are prejudicial to
 the Accused and that it did not have any notice in order to adequately respond to them. The Trial Chamber recalls that these Defence objections were
 extensively addressed in the Trial Chamber's decision of 31 October 2008. In this decision, the Trial Chamber found that evidence relating to the
 campaign of sniping and shelling did not constitute unscheduled incidents. The Trial Chamber recalled that in relation to crimes against humanity,
 "it is well-established in the jurisprudence that the Prosecution must prove not only the underlying offences of those crimes (which are represented by
 the scheduled incidents), but also the existence of a widespread or systematic attack on the civilian population". In the same decision, the Trial
 Chamber also found that no prejudice was caused to the Accused as he was put on notice well in advance by the 65 ter witness summaries which made
 reference to unscheduled incidents in
 relation to which the Prosecution had to seek leave of the Trial Chamber. 


(h) Intercepted Communications

55.    On 21 December 2009, the Trial Chamber admitted several intercepted communications ("intercepts") into evidence. The Trial Chamber also took
 judicial notice of intercepted communications that had been admitted into evidence in the Prosecutor v. Popović et al. case. In its Final Brief,
 the Defence submits that there is no proof as to the methodology for the collection of the intercepts. In particular, it avers that MP-17 failed to
 provide any adequate foundation and that
 " the intelligence notes are replete with conjecture, speculation and assumptions that cannot be tested". The Trial Chamber notes that the documents
 the Defence refers to as "intelligence notes" include both intercepts and intelligence notes. Intercepts of the more important conversations were
 both transcribed and copied on other tapes for archive, while less important conversations were summarised into what were called intelligence notes. The Trial Chamber notes that the concerns raised by the Defence relate to the reliability of these documents and were taken in consideration when
 deciding on the admission of the documents. In addition, in assessing the intercepts, the Trial Chamber duly considered the testimony of MP-16 and
 MP-17 on the process of interception and transcription of communication. The Trial Chamber has also taken into account the testimony of those
 witnesses in relation to the voice recognition and use of code-names in communication. Hence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied with the methodology used in putting together the intelligence notes and transcribing the intercepts.

56.    Regarding the intercepted communications of which the Trial Chamber took judicial notice, the Trial Chamber notes that Rule 94(B) creates a
 presumption for the authenticity of these documents, which has not been rebutted by the Defence. 

57.    In light of all the evidence on the trial record, the Trial Chamber has awarded appropriate weight to both intercepts and intelligence notes taking
 into account the fact that intelligence notes
 are summaries of conversations rather than transcriptions of conversations.


(i)Documents and Statements of Individuals Admitted Solely for Credibility Purposes and Not for the Truth of Their Content

58.    During the trial, several documents including prior statements of witnesses were admitted by the Trial Chamber solely for the purpose of assessing
 witnesses' credibility. The Trial Chamber used such evidence strictly for the purpose for which it was admitted, i.e. to assess the credibility of
 the witness, and disregarded it in relation to the truth of its content.
(j) Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines

59.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that Paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines violated the Accused's right to examine or have examined the
 witnesses who testified against him. In addition, the Defence submits that based on Paragraph 13 of the Guidelines, the Trial Chamber would be
 obliged to disregard Krayishnik's testimony regarding Lešić's witness statement as the latter did not testify in the present case. 

60.    The Trial Chamber recalls that the Guidelines governed the admission and presentation of evidence in court during the trial and were equally
 applicable to both parties. The purpose of this part of the Guidelines was to ensure that a party using a prior statement of a different person to
 confront a witness also calls that person to testify as a witness. In relation to Krayishnik's testimony, the Defence posed questions to Krayishnik
 based on Milan Lešić's prior interview with the Prosecution. Since the Defence did not call or try to call Lešić to testify
 during the Defence case, the part of Krayishnik's testimony regarding Lešić's prior interview will not be considered by the Trial Chamber.
 Considering that the Defence had the opportunity to call Lešić and was well aware of the Guidelines the Trial Chamber is of the view that the
 Accused was not prejudiced by the application of paragraphs 12 and 13 of the Guidelines. In addition, the Trial Chamber notes that
 neither party sought reconsideration of the Guidelines, nor certification to appeal them, upon their
 adoption at the start of the trial.


(k) Documents Admitted through the Bar Table

61.    The Trial Chamber admitted into evidence hundreds of documents through the bar table in accordance with Rule 89(C). In its Final Brief, the
 Defence urged the Trial Chamber to exercise extreme caution in attributing weight to documents admitted through the bar table and thus introduced in
 isolation. The Defence submits that the vast majority of these documents were never testified to by a witness and should thus be awarded less weight
 than those that were explained by the testimony of a witness. While there is no basis for assuming that, as a general rule, bar table documents
 carry less weight than those that were explained by the testimony of a witness,
 especially in light of the fact that many of them were self-explanatory, the Trial Chamber has carefully considered them in light of all the evidence
 adduced at trial and given them appropriate weight.
(l) Agreed Facts, Adjudicated Facts and Stipulations
(i) Agreed Facts and Stipulations

62.    Upon the encouragement of the Trial Chamber, the Parties reached an agreement on material facts relating to the Indictment on 31 May 2007. However, due to the fact that, the Accused apparently did not consent to the facts contained in the agreement, the Parties sought permission to
 withdraw the agreement and substitute it with a new agreement. The Trial Chamber subsequently admitted the new agreed facts into evidence. The
 Trial Chamber also admitted a "Joint Stipulation" by the Parties relating to Schedule B of the Indictment. The Trial Chamber considered this
 stipulation as an agreed fact. At the same time, the Trial Chamber underlines that it
 is not bound by any agreements reached by the Parties and is not obliged to make explicit findings on such agreed facts. The Trial Chamber notes
 that the reference to such facts is by itself indicative that the Trial Chamber considers those facts to be accurate.
(ii) Judicial Notice of Adjudicated Facts



63.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of hundreds of adjudicated facts pursuant to Rule
 94(B) from the following cases: Galić, Martić, Krstić, Blagojević and Jokić, and Dragomir
 Milošević. 

64.    The effect of taking judicial notice pursuant to Rule 94(B) is that the Prosecution is relieved of its initial burden to produce evidence on the
 point; and the Defence may then put the point into question by introducing reliable and credible evidence to the contrary. Importantly, however, the
 judicial notice of adjudicated facts "does not shift the ultimate burden of persuasion which remains with the Prosecution". The Trial Chamber in
 assessing the ultimate weight to be given to the adjudicated facts took into consideration the totality of the trial record and, in particular, the
 evidence adduced by the non-moving party to rebut the adjudicated facts.
(m) Supreme Defence Council ("SDC") Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

65.    The Trial Chamber admitted several stenographic transcripts and minutes of the FRY SDC. In its Final Brief, the Defence contends that the
 Prosecution must corroborate statements found in these documents when they are "relied on to prove intent, liability and factual matters". 

66.    The Trial Chamber took into account the stenographic transcripts as well as the minutes of the FRY SDC in light of the entire evidence adduced in
 this case and gave them appropriate weight. The Trial Chamber generally finds that the SDC stenographic transcripts and minutes are reliable
 contemporaneous records of the events that occurred.
(n) VJ Collegium Stenographic Transcripts and Minutes

67.    The Trial Chamber admitted into evidence a number of VJ Collegium stenographic transcripts and minutes. In its Final Brief, the Defence maintains
 that these documents lack sufficient indicia of authenticity. It argues that it would be unsafe to rely on these extracted pages on which the Accused
 is recorded as being the speaker without having an understanding of the
 totality of the circumstances. 



68.    In its decision of 21 December 2009 admitting these documents into evidence, the Trial Chamber addressed the Defence's objections regarding their
 authenticity. The Trial Chamber has carefully considered them in light of all the evidence adduced at trial, as well as the relevant context, when
 deciding on the appropriate weight. In some instances it has decided to disregard them.
(o) Mladić Notebook Excerpts

69.    On 29 March 2010, the Serbian Government handed over to the Prosecution the Mladić Notebooks. The Trial Chamber has admitted into evidence
 several excerpts of the notebooks. In its Final Brief, the Defence submits that the content of the Mladić Notebooks must be viewed with extreme caution, particularly in cases where
 the Prosecution introduced portions thereof without any corroboration. The Defence further submits that in cases where the Mladić Notebooks
 "reflect a fact" or the purpose of their usage is to prove acts and conduct or establish the knowledge
 of the Accused, the Trial Chamber should not rely on them devoid of any corroborating evidence. 

70.    In assessing the Mladić Notebooks, the Trial Chamber finds that although some of the excerpts were not testified to by a viva voce witness or
 otherwise corroborated, the Mladić Notebooks are generally reliable and an authentic contemporaneous record of the events that occurred. The Trial
 Chamber recalls in this respect that it gave the Defence the possibility to recall
 certain witnesses to address the issues raised in the Mladić Notebooks. The Trial Chamber has
 carefully considered them in light of all the evidence adduced at trial and given them appropriate weight.


II. APPLICABLE LAW
A. General Requirements of Article 3 of the Statute

71.    Borislav Vuković is charged with violations of the laws and customs of war pursuant to
 Article 3 of the Statute, namely three counts of murder and two counts of attacks on civilians. In accordance with the Tribunal's jurisprudence, for Article 3 to apply, the following preliminary requirements must be met.
1. Existence of an Armed Conflict and Nexus Between the Alleged Acts of the Perpetrator and the Armed Conflict

72.    The first requirement is that an armed conflict, either of international or non-international character, existed at the time material to the
 indictment. According to the Appeals Chamber, an "armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort to armed force between States or protracted armed
 violence between governmental authorities and organised armed groups or between such groups within a State". Until a general conclusion of peace or
 a peaceful settlement is reached, international humanitarian law continues to apply "in the whole territory of the warring States or, in the case of
 internal conflicts, the whole territory under the control of a party, whether or not actual combat takes place there". 

73.    A further requirement of Article 3 is that there be a sufficient link between the armed conflict and the perpetrator's alleged conduct. The
 alleged crime does not need to have been committed at a time when, or in a place where, actual fighting was taking place. It is sufficient that the
 alleged crimes were closely related to hostilities occurring in other parts of territories
 controlled by the parties to the conflict. However, it is essential that a Trial Chamber establish the existence of a geographical and temporal link between the crimes ascribed to the accused and the armed conflict. The armed conflict "need not have
 been causal to the commission of the crime, but the existence of an armed conflict must, at a minimum, have played a substantial part in the
 perpetrator's ability to commit it, his decision to commit it, the manner in which it was committed or the purpose for which it was committed". 
2. The Tadić Conditions

74.    In the Tadić Jurisdiction Decision, the Appeals Chamber held that "Article 3 is a general clause covering all violations of humanitarian law
 not falling under Article 2 or covered by Articles
 4 or 5" and that it "functions as a residual clause designed to ensure that no serious violation of
 international humanitarian law is taken away from the jurisdiction of the International Tribunal". 

75.    For criminal conduct to fall under Article 3 of the Statute, four conditions, commonly referred to as the "Tadić conditions", must be met:

(i) The violation must constitute an infringement of a rule of international humanitarian law;

(ii) The rule must be customary in nature, or, if it belongs to treaty law, the required conditions must be met;

(iii) The violation must be "serious", that is to say, it must constitute a breach of a rule protecting important values, and the breach must involve
 grave consequences for the victim; and

(iv) The violation of the rule must entail, under customary or conventional law, the individual criminal responsibility of the person breaching the
 rule. 

76.    The crime of murder is proscribed by Article 3(1)(a) common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 ("Common Article 3"). It is settled
 jurisprudence of the Tribunal that Article 3 of the Statute encompasses violations of Common Article 3. The Appeals Chamber has held that Common
 Article 3 "is indeed regarded as being part of customary international law,
 and serious violations thereof would at once satisfy the four requirements". 



77.    The crime of attacks on civilians is proscribed by Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
 Conventions of 1949. These articles both provide, in relevant part, that " t he civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not
 be made the object of attack". The Appeals Chamber held that the principles contained in Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of
 Additional Protocol II have attained the status of customary international law. Furthermore, the jurisprudence of the Tribunal has repeatedly held that "attacks against civilians undoubtedly breach rules protecting important values and involves grave consequences for the
 victim". The Appeals Chamber also held that " c ustomary international law establishes that a violation of these principles entails individual criminal responsibility". The Trial Chamber therefore finds that in regard to the crime of attacks
		on civilians all four Tadić conditions are met in the present case.
3. Status of the Victims

78.    Violations of Common Article 3 must have been committed against " p ersons taking no active part in the hostilities, including members of armed
 forces who have laid down their arms and those placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds, detention or any other cause". The perpetrator
 must have or should have been aware of this fact. The legal test for determining whether the victim was taking an active part in hostilities was first adopted in the Tadić Trial Judgement, when the Trial Chamber noted that " i t is
 sufficient to examine the relevant facts of each victim and to ascertain whether, in each individual's circumstances, that person was actively involved
 in hostilities at the relevant time". The Appeals Chamber further clarified the concept of active
 participation in hostilities, holding that the victim, at the time of the alleged offence, must not have been "participating in acts of war which by
 their nature or purpose are intended to cause actual harm to the personnel or equipment of the enemy's armed forces", adding that the status
 determination is to be done on a case-by-case basis. 


B. General Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

79.    Borislav Vuković is charged with crimes against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute, namely three counts of murder, three counts of
 inhumane acts, one count of persecution on political, racial or religious grounds and one count of extermination. 
1. Requirements of Article 5 of the Statute

80.    In order to constitute a crime against humanity under Article 5 of the Statute, it is required that (i) there was an armed conflict, and (ii) the
 acts of the perpetrator were geographically and temporally linked with the armed conflict. 

81.    Moreover, it is required that the acts of the perpetrator be part of a widespread or systematic attack "directed against any civilian
 population". This requirement encompasses the five elements listed below.

82.    There must have been an "attack". An "attack" may be defined as a course of conduct involving the commission of acts of violence. In the
 context of crimes against humanity, an "attack" is distinct from the concept of "armed conflict" and not limited to the use of armed force. Rather, it
 may encompass any mistreatment of the civilian population. The attack may precede, outlast or continue during the armed conflict and need not be
 part of it. 

83.    The attack must have been directed against the civilian population. This means that the civilian population must be the primary object of
 attack. It is not a requirement that the attack be against the whole civilian population. However, a Trial Chamber must be satisfied that the attack was in fact directed against a civilian population, rather than against a limited and randomly selected number of individuals. 

84.    A population may qualify as "civilian" even if individuals who do not fall within the definition of civilians are among it. In order to
 determine whether the presence of non-civilians deprives the population of its civilian character, the number of non-civilians, as well as whether they
 are on leave or laid down their arms, must be examined. 

85.    The requirement under Article 5 that an attack be directed against a civilian population does not mean that the individual victims of criminal acts
 committed within the attack must be civilians only. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal does not suggest that a Trial Chamber is required to determine
 whether every single individual victim of the alleged crimes against humanity is a "civilian" under international humanitarian law. As a
 consequence, persons hors de combat may also fall under the protection of Article 5 of the Statute. 

86.    The attack must also be widespread or systematic. "Widespread" means that the attack is large in scale with a large number of victims, while
 "systematic" refers to the organised nature of the attack. It is settled jurisprudence that the existence of a plan need not be proven. 

87.    The acts of the perpetrator must form part of the attack. However, they need not be committed in the midst of that attack. A crime which is
 committed before or after the main attack against the civilian population or away from it could still, if sufficiently connected, be part of that attack for the purpose of Article 5. 



88.    The perpetrator must know that there is an attack directed against the civilian population and that his acts are part of that attack, or at least
 he must take the risk that his acts form part thereof. However, knowledge of the details of the attack is not necessary. Neither is it required that the perpetrator share the purpose or goal behind the attack. 
C. Attacks on Civilians

89.    Vuković is charged with two counts of attacks on civilians, a violation of the laws or customs of war pursuant to Article 3 of the Statute
 (Counts 4 and 8). The crime of attacks on civilians is based upon Article 51(2) of Additional Protocol I and Article 13(2) of Additional Protocol II
 both of which provide, in their relevant parts, that " t he civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, shall not be made the object
 of attack". 
1. Actus Reus

90.    The actus reus of the crime of attacks on civilians is conducting an attack directed against the civilian population or individual civilians
 causing death or serious injury to body or health. 

91.    The term "attack" is defined under Article 49 of Additional Protocol I as "acts of violence against the adversary, whether in offence or in
 defence". 

92.    Article 50 of Additional Protocol I defines a "civilian" as "any person who does not belong to one of the categories of persons referred to in
 Article 4(A)(1), (2), (3) and (6) of the Third Geneva Convention and in Article 43 of Additional Protocol I". The term "civilian" is defined negatively
 as anyone who is not a member of the armed forces or of an organised military group
 belonging to a party to the conflict. Members of the armed forces and members of militias or volunteer corps forming part of such armed forces cannot claim civilian status. Neither can members of organised resistance groups. The Appeals
 Chamber has held that:







The specific situation of the victim at the time the crimes are committed may not be determinative of his civilian or non-civilian status. If he is
 indeed a member of an armed organization, the fact that he is not armed or in combat at the time of the commission of crimes,
 does not accord him civilian status. 



93.    The protection from attack afforded to civilians is suspended when and for such time they directly take part in hostilities. In such cases, they
 become a legitimate target. Taking "direct" part in the hostilities entails engaging in acts of war that by their nature or purpose are likely to cause
 actual harm to the personnel or matériel of the enemy armed forces. 

94.    The presence of individual combatants within the population being attacked does not necessarily deprive the population of its characterisation as
 civilian. The Appeals Chamber has held that "in order to determine whether the presence of soldiers within a civilian population deprives the
 population of its civilian character, the number of soldiers, as well as whether they are on leave, must be examined". 

95.    In determining whether the attack was directed against civilians or the civilian population, the Trial Chamber is entitled to base itself on a
 case-by-case analysis, taking into account various factors, including:







The means and method used in the course of the attack, the status of the victims, their number,
 … the nature of the crimes committed in its course, the resistance to the assailants at the time and the extent to which the attacking force may
 be said to have complied or attempted to comply with the precautionary requirements of the laws of war. 



In addition, the distance between the victims and the source of fire, the ongoing combat activity at the time and location of the incident, the
 presence of military activities or facilities in the vicinity of the incident, the victims' appearance, including their age, gender, clothing and activity may also be relevant. 

96.    In customary international law, there is an absolute prohibition against targeting of civilians which may not be derogated from due to military
 necessity. However, this does not exclude the possibility of civilian casualties incidental to an attack aimed at legitimate military targets
 provided they are proportionate to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated prior to the attack. 

97.    Indiscriminate attacks, that is to say, attacks which strike civilians or civilian objects and military objectives without distinction, may qualify
 as direct attacks on civilians. In this regard, a direct attack against civilians can be inferred from the indiscriminate character of the weapon
 used. An attack which may cause civilian casualties disproportionate to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated is to be considered
 as indiscriminate. Such an attack may also give rise to the inference that civilians were the object of attack. 

98.    The parties to a conflict have an obligation "to remove civilians, to the maximum extent feasible from the vicinity of military objectives and to
 avoid locating military objectives within or near densely populated areas". However, "the failure of a party to abide by this obligation does not
 relieve the attacking side of its duty to abide by the principles of distinction and proportionality when launching an attack". 

99.    Finally, the attack in question must have resulted in death or serious injury to body or health within the civilian population. 
2. Mens Rea

100.    In order to satisfy the mens rea required for the crime of attacks on civilians, the Prosecution
 must establish that the perpetrator wilfully made the civilian population or individual civilians the object of attack. The concept of "wilfulness" encompasses both the notions of direct intent and indirect intent, that is, the concept of
 recklessness, excluding mere negligence. 

101.    It must also be proven that the perpetrator was aware or should have been aware of the civilian status of the persons attacked. International
 humanitarian law dictates that if there is doubt about a person's status, he shall be considered a civilian. In the context of a criminal trial, it
 is the Prosecution that must prove that "in the given circumstances a reasonable person could not have believed that the individual he or she attacked
 was a combatant". The intent to target civilians can be proved through inferences from direct or circumstantial evidence. The Appeals
 Chamber further held that "[t]here is no requirement of the intent to attack particular civilians;
 rather it is prohibited to make the civilian population as such, as well as individual civilians, the object of an attack". 
D. Murder

102.    In addition to the general requirements of Articles 3 and 5 of the Statute set out above, the elements of the crime of murder are the following:

i. the death of a victim;

ii. the death was the result of an act or omission of the perpetrator; and

iii. the perpetrator intended to kill the victim or wilfully harm or inflict serious injury with the reasonable knowledge that the attack was likely to
 result in death. 

103.    The actus reus of murder requires that the victim died as a result of an act or omission of the perpetrator. Proof beyond reasonable doubt that
 the person was murdered does not require retrieval of the victim's dead body. The death may be established by circumstantial evidence, provided it is the only reasonable inference that can
 be drawn from the evidence. 

104.    The mens rea for murder includes both direct and indirect intent. Direct intent requires the perpetrator's desire to cause the death of the victim
 as a result of his act or omission, whereas indirect intent comprises the perpetrator's knowledge that the death of the victim was the probable
 consequence of his act or omission. Negligence and gross negligence cannot be construed as
 indirect intent. 
E. Extermination

105.    Vuković is charged with extermination, as a crime against humanity under Article 5(b) of the Statute (Count 13).

106.    Extermination is the act of killing on a large scale. The jurisprudence of the Tribunal has consistently held that, apart from the question of
 scale, the core elements of murder and extermination are the same. The actus reus consists of "any act, omission or combination thereof that
 contributes directly or indirectly to the killing of a large number of individuals". It also includes subjecting "a widespread number of people, or
 the systematic subjection of a number of people, to conditions of living that would lead to their deaths". 

107.    The requirement of killings on a large scale does not suggest a numerical minimum, nor a precise identification of certain named or described
 persons; it suffices to establish that killings occurred on a mass scale. An assessment of whether this requirement has been met must be made on the basis of a case-by-case analysis of all relevant factors. It is not necessary that a large number of killings occurred during a single
 incident in a concentrated place over a short period. It may also be found "on an accumulation of separate and unrelated incidents, meaning on an
 aggregated basis". The Trial Chamber further notes that the elements of the crime of extermination neither require the existence of a "vast scheme
 of collective murder". 

108.    The mens rea for extermination is that "the accused intended, by his acts or omissions, either killing on a large scale, or the subjection of a
 widespread number of people, or systematic subjection of a number of people, to conditions of living that would lead to their deaths". 
F. Other Inhumane Acts

109.    Vuković is charged with inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity punishable under Article
 5(i) of the Statute. These include injuring and wounding civilians (Counts 3 and 7) and inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer
 (Count 11).

110.    "Other inhumane acts" is a category of crimes against humanity recognised as forming part of customary international law. It functions as a
 residual category for serious crimes that are not otherwise enumerated in Article 5 of the Statute, but which require proof of the same chapeau
 elements. 

111.    According to the Appeals Chamber, serious physical and mental injury or wounding is an "inhumane act" within the meaning of Article 5 of the
 Statute. To establish the actus reus "the victim must have suffered serious bodily or mental harm" and the suffering must be the result of an act of
 the perpetrator. The degree of severity must be assessed on a case by case basis with due
 regard for the individual circumstances. 



112.    The mens rea for the crime of inhumane acts is satisfied if, at the time of the act or omission, the perpetrator had direct or indirect intent to
 inflict, by act or omission, serious physical or mental suffering or to commit a serious attack on the victim's human dignity. Indirect intent
 requires that the perpetrator knew that his or her act or omission was likely to cause serious physical or mental suffering or a serious attack upon
 human dignity and was reckless thereto. 

113.    Forcible transfer is considered in the jurisprudence of the Tribunal to constitute "other inhumane acts". Forcible transfer entails the
 forcible displacement of persons from the area in which they are lawfully present, without grounds permitted under international law. 

114.    The actus reus of forcible transfer is the forced displacement of persons within national boundaries. The element that the displacement be
 forced requires that the victims had no genuine choice in their displacement. Fear of violence, duress, detention, psychological oppression, and
 other such circumstances may create an environment where there is no choice but to leave, thus amounting to the forced displacement of persons. In
 situations where the victims have consented, or even requested, their removal, that consent "must be real in the sense that it is given voluntarily and
 as a result of the individual's free will, assessed in the light of surrounding circumstances". Consequently, the trier of fact must consider the prevailing situation and atmosphere, as well as all relevant circumstances, including in particular
 the victims' vulnerability, when assessing whether the displaced victims had a genuine choice to remain or leave. 

115.    International law recognises limited circumstances under which involuntary displacements are permitted on humanitarian grounds. Thus, in cases
 where displacements are permitted on
 humanitarian grounds, the act of displacement cannot constitute the actus reus of forcible transfer. However, displacements for humanitarian reasons are not justifiable where the humanitarian crisis that caused the displacement is itself
 the result of the accused's own unlawful activity. 

116.    The mens rea of forcible transfer is that the perpetrator must intend to displace the victims within the relevant national border. It is not
 necessary that the perpetrator intends the
 displacement to be permanent. 
G. Persecutions

117.    Vuković is charged with persecutions on political, racial or religious grounds, as a crime against humanity under Article 5(h) of the Statute
 (Count 12), including murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer.

118.    The crime of persecutions consists of an act or omission which:

(a) discriminates in fact and which denies or infringes upon a fundamental right laid down in international customary or treaty law (actus reus); and

(b) was carried out deliberately with the intention to discriminate on political, racial or religious grounds (mens rea). 

119.    The acts underlying the crime of persecutions can include those listed under the other sub- headings of Article 5 of the Statute or provided for
 elsewhere in the Statute, as well as other acts that are not explicitly mentioned in the Statute. The Trial Chamber notes in this respect that
 the underlying act itself need not constitute a crime in international law. However, not any denial or infringement of a fundamental right,
 committed with the requisite discriminatory intent, is serious enough to constitute the crime of persecution as a crime against humanity. In order
 to amount to persecutions, acts not enumerated as a crime under the Statute must be of equal gravity to the
 crimes listed in Article 5 of the Statute, whether considered in isolation or in conjunction with other acts. In order to apply the standard of gravity, these acts should be examined in their context and with consideration of their cumulative
 effect. 

120.    According to the jurisprudence of the Tribunal, the act of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment as well as forcible transfer, charged by the
 Prosecution under Count 12 of the Indictment, may constitute underlying acts of the crime of persecution. 

121.    The mens rea for persecutions requires a specific intent to discriminate on political, racial or religious grounds. This intent must be aimed
 at a group, rather than an individual; thus, the mens rea "is the specific intent to cause injury to a human being because he belongs to a particular
 community or group". It is the requirement that the underlying act be committed on discriminatory grounds that distinguishes persecution from other
 crimes against humanity. There is no requirement that the perpetrator possess a "persecutory intent" over and above a discriminatory intent. 

122.    The discriminatory intent may, for example, be inferred from the discriminatory nature of an attack characterised as a crime against humanity,
 provided that the circumstances surrounding the commission of the alleged acts substantiate the existence of such a specific intent. Circumstances
 that may be taken into consideration when inferring discriminatory intent include "the systematic nature of the crimes committed against a racial or
 religious group and the general attitude of the alleged perpetrator as demonstrated by his behaviour". Generally, such "specific intent in general
 can only be inferred from objective facts and the general conduct of an accused seen in its entirety". 

123.    The Prosecution charges Vuković with the crime of murder as a crime against humanity under Counts 1, 5 and 9, and as a violation of the laws or customs of war under Counts 2, 6 and 10 pursuant to Articles 5 and 3 of the Statute respectively. Common Article 3(1) (a) of the Geneva
 Conventions provides the basis for the inclusion of murder under Article 3 of the Statute. 
H. Individual Criminal Responsibility
1. Responsibility Under Article 7(1) of the Statute - Aiding and Abetting

124.    The Prosecution charges Borislav Vuković with aiding and abetting the planning, preparation or execution of the crimes alleged in Counts 1 to
 4 and 9 to 13 of the Indictment pursuant to Article
 7(1). 

125.    Article 7(1) of the Statute provides:







A person who planned, instigated, ordered, committed or otherwise aided and abetted in the planning, preparation or execution of a crime referred to in
 articles 2 to 5 of the present Statute, shall be individually responsible for the crime.


(a) Aiding and Abetting
(i)Actus Reus

126.    "Aiding and abetting" consists of acts or omissions directed at providing practical assistance, encouragement or moral support to the perpetration
 of the crime, which have a substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime. The Appeals Chamber expressly stated that
 "specific direction" is not a requisite element of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. There is no
 requirement of a cause-effect relationship between the conduct of the aider and abettor and the commission of the crime or that such conduct served as
 a condition precedent to the commission of the crime. The actus reus of aiding and abetting a crime may occur before, during, or after the principal crime has been committed and at a
 location which is removed from that where the principal crime is committed. 

127.    The aider and abettor is always an accessory to the crime perpetrated by another person, the principal. For an accused to be liable for aiding
 and abetting, the underlying crime must ultimately be committed by the principal perpetrator. It is however not necessary that the latter be identified
 or tried, even in cases of crimes requiring specific intent. It is also not necessary that the principal perpetrator be aware of the aider and
 abettor's contribution to the crime. 

128.    The determination of whether conduct substantially assists the commission of a crime requires a fact-based inquiry. The Appeals Chamber has
 determined that the actus reus of aiding and abetting may be satisfied by a commander permitting the use of resources under his or her control,
 including personnel, to facilitate the perpetration of a crime. Furthermore, the fact that the aider and abettor's conduct amounted to no more than
 his "routine duties" does not exculpate him, if such conduct substantially contributed to the commission of the crime. 
(ii) Mens Rea

129.    The requisite mental element of aiding and abetting is knowledge that the acts performed assist the commission of the specific crime of the
 principal perpetrator. The aider and abettor must be aware of the "essential elements" of the crime committed by the principal perpetrator,
 including the state of mind of the principal perpetrator. It is not required, however, that the aider and abettor share the mens rea required for
 such crime. 

130.    As consistently confirmed by the Appeals Chamber:









[I]t is not necessary that the aider and abettor knows either the precise crime that was intended or the one that was, in the event,
 committed. If he is aware that one of a number of crimes will probably be committed, and one of those crimes is in fact committed, he has intended to
 facilitate
 the commission of that crime, and is guilty as an aider and abettor. 



131.    In addition, the Appeals Chamber recently recalled that it rejected an elevated mens rea requirement for aiding and abetting, namely the
 proposition that the aider and abettor needs to have intended to provide assistance. 

132.    In cases of specific intent crimes, the aider and abettor must know of the principal perpetrator's specific intent. 
(iii) Omission

133.    As anticipated earlier, the actus reus may, under certain circumstances, take the form of an omission. The Appeals Chamber has consistently
 indicated that an accused may incur criminal responsibility under Article 7(1) for omission where there is a legal duty to act. The Appeals Chamber
 in Mrkšić and Šljivančanin recently found that the Trial Chamber in that case "properly considered aiding and abetting by omission
 as a recognised mode of liability under the International Tribunal's jurisdiction". 

134.    The actus reus and mens rea requirements in order to enter a conviction for aiding and abetting by omission are the same as for aiding and
 abetting by a positive act. It follows that the actus reus will be fulfilled when it is established that, given the circumstances of the case, the
 failure to discharge a legal duty to act was directed to assist, encourage or lend moral support to the perpetration of the crime and had a substantial
 effect on the realisation of that crime. As to the
 mens rea, "the aider and abettor must know that his omission assists in the commission of the crime of the principal perpetrator and must be aware of the essential elements of the crime which was ultimately committed by the principal perpetrator". 

135.    The Appeals Chamber held that this form of liability necessarily and implicitly requires that the accused had the ability to act, i.e. that "there
 were means available to the accused to fulfil his legal duty". 
(iv) "Tacit Approval and Encouragement"

136.    An accused may incur criminal responsibility for aiding and abetting, "when it is established that his conduct amounted to tacit approval and
 encouragement of the crime and that such conduct substantially contributed to the crime". The Appeals Chamber in Brđanin drew a distinction
 between aiding and abetting by omission where there is a legal duty to act and aiding and abetting by tacit approval and encouragement. The criminal
 responsibility for "tacit approval and encouragement" is based not on a duty to act, but on "the encouragement and support that might be afforded to
 the principals of the crime from such an omission". In cases where criminal responsibility was found, the accused held a position of authority over
 the principal perpetrator and was present at the scene of the crime. Such combination allowed the inference that his non- intervention amounted to
 tacit approval and encouragement. The contribution of the accused does not need to be tangible and his presence does not need to be a conditio sine
 qua non to the commission of the crime by the principal perpetrator, provided he is aware of the possible effect of his presence on the commission of
 the crime. 
2. Responsibility Under Article 7(3) of the Statute - Superior Responsibility

[Omitted. The Trial Chamber found that the conditions of superior responsibility were not met. The prosecution has not appealed this finding.]


III. GENERAL OVERVIEW OF EVENTS IN CROATIA AND BIH BETWEEN 1990 AND 1995

161.    The purpose of this part of the judgement is to provide a short account of the background to the conflict in the SFRY.

162.    Prior to its dissolution, the SFRY consisted of six republics - Bosnia and Herzegovina ("BiH"), Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and
 Slovenia - and two autonomous regions, Kosovo and Vojvodina. With the death of Josip Broz Tito on 4 May 1980, the unity of the one-
 party federal state started to weaken. By the late 1980s, the League of Communists lost its
 leading political role. In June 1991, the SFRY began to disintegrate. On 25 June 1991, Slovenia and Croatia declared their independence from the SFRY,
 which led to the outbreak of the war. While the conflict ended in Slovenia, clashes in Croatia escalated into full war as from summer 1991. In
 1992, conflict also erupted in BiH. 
A. Croatia

163.    In April and May 1990, multi-party elections were held and, as a result, the Serbian Democratic Party ("SDS") gained power in the municipalities
 of Benkovac, Donji Lapac, Gratac, Glina, Korenica, Knin, Obrovac, and Vojnić. In July 1990, a Serbian Assembly was established in Srb, north of
 Knin, and moved to declare the sovereignty and autonomy of the Serb people in Croatia. The executive body of the Serbian Assembly, the Serbian
 National Council, called for a
 referendum on the autonomy of Serbs in Croatia, which was held from 19 August 1990 to 2
 September 1990, and resulted in a 97. 7 % vote for autonomy. On 21 December 1990, the Serbian
 Autonomous District ("SAO") of Krajina was established. 

164.    On 12 May 1991, SAO Krajina held a referendum on whether its people favoured the
 "accession of the SAO Krajina to the Republic of Serbia and remaining of Krajina in Yugoslavia with Serbia, Montenegro and others who want to preserve Yugoslavia", resulting in a 99.8% approval. On 19 May 1991, a separate referendum was
 held in Croatia, except in predominantly Serb areas, leading 94.1% of voters to favour Croatian independence. Ten days after the referendum, on 29
 May 1991, the SAO Krajina Assembly adopted a constitutional law describing the SAO Krajina as a subject of political and territorial autonomy within
 federal Yugoslavia. On
 25 June 1991, Croatia declared independence. 

165.    The spring of 1991 saw the beginning of several ongoing clashes between Croatian armed forces and the forces of the SAO Krajina, including in
 Kijevo, Drniš, Hrvatska Dubica, Saborsko and Škabrnja. In the summer of 1991, the conflict in Vukovar was partly initiated by a JNA
 attempt to "deblock" its local barracks, which were being blockaded by Croatian paramilitaries. 

166.    On 23 November 1991, the Vance Plan was signed by the President of Croatia, Franjo Tuñman, the President of Serbia, Slobodan
 Milošević and the SFRY Federal Secretary for Defence General, Veljko Kadijević. The Vance Plan made provisions for the deployment of
 UNPROFOR forces in the Krajina, Western Slavonia and Eastern Slavonia, for demilitarisation, and for the eventual return of refugees. On 21 February
 1992, the United Nations Security Council ("UNSC") adopted Resolution 743, implementing the Vance Plan and establishing the UN Protection Force
 ("UNPROFOR"), resulting in the deployment of forces to certain areas of Croatia designated as "United Nations Protected Areas" ("UNPAs"). The UNPAs
 were areas where inter- communal tensions had previously led to armed conflict. In April 1992, UNPROFOR troops began arriving in the UNPAs. 

167.    In December 1991, the SAO Krajina was joined by two other SAOs on Croatian territory
 (SAO Slavonia, Baranja and Western Srem as well as the SAO Western Slavonia). As a result, on
 19 December 1991, the Republic of Serbian Krajina ("RSK") was formed. 



168.    In October 1992, RSK established its military force, the Serbian Army of Krajina ("SVK"). 

169.    In January 1994, elections were held in RSK and Milan Martić was elected President. The Zagreb Peace Agreement between Croatia and RSK was
 signed in March 1994. This led to an economic agreement, signed in Knin in December 1994, and an agreement to re-open a highway from Belgrade to
 Zagreb that had been closed since August 1991. 

170.    In January 1995, President Tuñman announced that he would refuse the extension of UNPROFOR's mandate in Croatia after the end of March
 1995. At one point, RSK authorities shut down the highway through Western Slavonia that had been opened pursuant to the December
 1994 agreement. Shortly afterwards, in the early morning hours of 1 May 1995, Croatian forces
 launched a military offensive known as Operation Flash. Negotiations to find a
 peaceful settlement led to an agreement reached on 3 May 1995. Operation Flash ended around 4 May 1995, with RSK losing control over Western
 Slavonia. 

171.    On 3 August 1995, negotiations were held in Geneva between Croatia and RSK. The next day, however, Croatian forces launched Operation Storm
 against RSK and by 10 August 1995, seized all of the territory held by RSK, except for the area of Eastern Slavonia. The RSK leadership fled to RS
 and the FRY. In 1996, the area of Eastern Slavonia was peacefully
 reintegrated into Croatia. 


B. Bosnia and Herzegovina

172.    As of 1991, the population of BiH was 43.7% Muslim, 31.3% Serb, 17.3% Croat and 7.7% Yugoslav or other. On 21 February 1990, the Assembly of
 BiH adopted legislation permitting the establishment of political parties, and scheduled multi-party elections for 18 November 1990. Three main political parties emerged, established principally along ethnic lines: the Serb Democratic Party ("SDS"), led by Radovan Karad`ić; the
 Party of Democratic Action ("SDA"), led by Alija Izetbegović; and the Croatian Democratic Union ("HDZ"), led by Stjepan Kljujić. 

173.    The multi-party elections were held as scheduled, and resulted in sweeping victories for the SDS, SDA and HDZ. The parties agreed that the
 position of President of the BiH Assembly should be allotted to Borislav Krajišnik of the SDS. Alija Izetbegović of the SDA was then
 elected President of the BiH Presidency, a post he held throughout the course of the war, while the position of Prime Minister went to Jure Pelivan
 of the HDZ. 

174.    It quickly became clear that the SDS, SDA and HDZ held starkly differing views, especially regarding the future of the BiH state. In particular,
 while the SDA advocated the independence and sovereignty of BiH, the SDS wished for BiH to remain within the federal state of Yugoslavia.

175.    At a meeting of the BiH Assembly on 14-15 October 1991, SDS President Radovan Karad`ić gave a speech in which he threatened that Muslims
 would disappear from BiH if they declared independence from the SFRY. At the same meeting, Assembly delegates of the SDA
 and HDZ voted in favour of a memorandum on sovereignty proposed by the SDA; " a measure
 bitterly opposed by SDS delegates" who had departed prior to the vote. The voting took place in the absence of SDS delegates. Ten days later, SDS delegates responded by founding the "Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH" (renamed "Assembly of
 Republika Srpska" in the late summer of 1992) and electing Borislav Krajišnik as its President. This body then adopted a decision proclaiming
 the formation of the Republic of the Serbian People of BiH. 

176.    On 9 and 10 November 1991, a plebiscite was held in BiH asking voters if they wished to remain in the SFRY. Voters were segregated by ethnicity
 and non-Serbs were given different ballots. Few non-Serbs took part in the plebiscite, while a vast majority of Bosnian Serbs voted in
 favour of remaining in the SFRY. 

177.    In the last months of 1991, the Arbitration Commission of the Conference on Yugoslavia ("Badinter Commission") was established by the European
 Community ("EC") to offer recommendations from a legal perspective on the independence of individual republics. The Badinter Commission was
 instructed to invite and assess applications from any Yugoslav republic seeking independence. On 20 December 1991, the BiH Presidency, over the
 dissent of its SDS
 members, voted to apply to the Badinter Commission for recognition as an independent state. 

178.    On 9 January 1992, the Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH declared the formation of the Serbian Republic of BiH ("SerBiH"). The republic
 aimed to include all Serbian autonomous
 districts in BiH, as well as any "other Serbian ethnic entities in BiH, including areas in which the Serbian people are in a minority because of genocide…committed during World War Two". The Assembly's declaration also stated that the republic
 should form part of the federal state of Yugoslavia. 

179.    The conclusions of the Badinter Commission, which were released at the same time as the declaration of a SerBiH state, found that BiH had not yet
 fulfilled the conditions for recognition, and recommended a referendum to determine the will of its people regarding independence. In response, the
 Assembly of BiH voted, over the objection of SDS delegates, to hold a referendum. 

180.    On 21 February 1992, with the political situation growing increasingly tense, the UNSC passed Resolution 743, establishing UNPROFOR to "create the
 conditions of peace and security required for the negotiation of an overall settlement of the Yugoslav crisis". 

181.    On 28 February 1992, hours before the referendum was set to begin, the Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH adopted a constitution for SerBiH. The referendum then proceeded with the majority of Bosnian Serbs boycotting the proceedings while Bosnian Muslims and Croats voted overwhelmingly for
 independence. 

182.    On 6 and 7 April 1992, the EC and the United States recognised the independence of BiH. The Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH immediately declared the independence of SerBiH. These events led to a surge in violence between opposite factions in Sarajevo. Serb forces started laying siege to Sarajevo, which would persist
 until November 1995. 



183.    The FRY, consisting of Serbia and Montenegro, was created with the proclamation of a new constitution on 27 April 1992. The BiH Presidency
 ordered the JNA to withdraw from its claimed territory. When the JNA declined to do so, the special police of the BiH Ministry of Interior ("MUP") and
 other units loyal to the BiH Government surrounded several JNA facilities in Sarajevo. A number of clashes ensued, resulting in casualties. 

184.    On 12 May 1992, the Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH adopted the six strategic goals of the Bosnian Serbs introduced by Radovan
 Karadžić. The first goal was separating Bosnian Serbs from the other two national communities-the Bosnian Muslims and the Bosnian
 Croats. The second was the establishment of a corridor between Semberija and Krajina. The third was the establishment of a corridor in the Drina Valley. The fourth was the establishment of external borders to the Serb entity on the Una and Neretva Rivers. The fifth concerned the division of the
 city of Sarajevo into Serbian and Muslim parts, and the implementation of effective state governments in each of these constituent states. The sixth and final goal was to secure access to the sea for the Serb entity. The Bosnian Serb
 army, later known as the VRS, was established on the same day. 

185.    The six strategic goals were communicated to the VRS, which regarded them as "a general guideline on which the VRS planned the actual operations
 and concerted battles". These goals were kept secret until November 1993, when an abbreviated version was published in the RS Official
 Gazette. 

186.    On 15 May 1992, the UNSC passed a resolution demanding a halt to "all forms of outside interference from outside of Bosnia-Herzegovina", as well
 as the complete withdrawal of all foreign forces from BiH, including the JNA and elements of the Croatian Army. 

187.    Although the FRY had officially withdrawn the JNA from BiH by 19 May 1992, the UNSC found that the situation on the ground reflected continued
 JNA involvement. It consequently condemned the FRY authorities for failing to take effective measures towards implementing the UNSC Resolution. On 30
 May 1992, the UNSC reinforced sanctions against the FRY. 

188.    On 8 June 1992, the UNSC issued Resolution 758, which broadened the mandate and strength of UNPROFOR and authorised the deployment of UN Military
 Observers ("UNMOs"). UNPROFOR was tasked, among other things, with protecting the Sarajevo airport and helping humanitarian aid reach the population. 

189.    In August 1992, the SerBiH was constitutionally renamed Republika Srpska ("RS"). Radovan Karadžić was elected President of RS on 17 December 1992. 

190.    In March 1993, there was a surge in VRS operations in eastern Bosnia, which resulted in a flood of refugees into Vlasenica and a dire humanitarian
 situation. On 16 April 1993, the UNSC adopted Resolution 819, declaring Vlasenica a "safe area" to be free from armed attack or any other hostile
 act. The UNSC extended the "safe area" designation to the towns of Tuzla, Žepa, Bihać and Gora`de on 6 May 1993. 

191.    In the summer of 1994, international diplomats attempted to end the Bosnian war by engaging in direct negotiations with the relevant parties. These efforts produced a peace proposal that included a map demarcating a division of Bosnian territory between the Bosnian Serbs and Bosnian
 Muslims. The Bosnian Serbs rejected the peace plan. In August 1994, the FRY opted to impose sanctions on RS due to its rejection of the plan.
 These sanctions included a blockade of their common border and the imposition of a trade embargo on all shipments into RS, except for
 food, clothes and medication. 

192.    At the end of 1994, a four-month ceasefire was declared in BiH. It expired in April 1995 after attempts to extend it failed. Over the next
 few months, the safe areas of Vlasenica and Žepa were forcibly overtaken by Bosnian Serb forces. 

193.    In early August 1995, Slobodan Milošević issued a public appeal for peace to Ratko Mladić
 and Alija Izetbegović. The United States government became involved in the peace initiative, as
 Richard Holbrooke, the Assistant Secretary of State for European and Eurasian Affairs, engaged in shuttle diplomacy between the various capitals in the region. During this period, FRY leaders began meeting with their RS counterparts to develop a
 common position regarding the forthcoming peace negotiations. They formed a joint peace negotiation delegation, composed of representatives from the
 FRY and RS, and agreed that Slobodan Milošević would have the deciding vote in the case of a disagreement within the delegation. 

194.    These negotiations culminated in the Dayton Accords, which ended the war in BiH. The
 Accords were signed preliminarily at the end of November 1995, followed by an official signing in
 Paris in December 1995. 


IV. POLITICAL ENTITIES AND STRUCTURE OF THE ARMIES
A. Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

195.    The FRY was established on 27 April 1992 with the approval of a new Constitution superseding the prior SFRY Constitution. The new Constitution
 provided that the FRY was a sovereign federal state and consisted of Serbia and Montenegro and the provinces of Kosovo and Vojvodina. 

196.    The FRY was organised on the principle of separation of powers, between the legislature, executive and judiciary. Principal federal organs of the
 FRY included the Federal Assembly, FRY President, Federal Government, the Supreme Defence Council ("SDC") and the Chief of General
 Staff of the Yugoslav Army ("VJ"). The federal judicial organs were the Federal Court, Federal
 Public Prosecutor and a Constitutional Court. 

197.    In addition to the Constitution, provisions regulating the functioning and composition of these organs were laid down in the Law on the Defence
 and the Law on the VJ, both of which were temporarily enacted in October 1993 by the FRY Assembly, and subsequently finalised on 18 May
 1994. Based on these legal provisions, the Trial Chamber will now turn to describe the structures
 and functioning of the federal organs which are relevant to the case, namely, the SDC, the FRY President, the Chief of the VJ General Staff and the
 MOD.
B. Organs of the FRY
1. The Supreme Defence Council

198.    According to the Constitution of the FRY, the SDC was formally composed of the President
 of the FRY and the Presidents of the Republics of Serbia and Montenegro. In practice, the SDC meetings were also attended by other high-level federal officials, such as the FRY Prime Minister, the FRY Minister of Defence, the Chief of the VJ
 General Staff and, occasionally, high-ranking military officers. 

199.    The President of the FRY presided over the SDC. The Law on Defence empowered the SDC to adopt the plan for the defence of the country, which
 "all subjects of the national defence", including the VJ, should pursue. 

200.    In its work, the SDC made use of reports, analyses and other materials prepared by the MOD, the VJ General Staff and other state organs. According to the Rules of Procedure adopted by the SDC in 1992, the SDC had to conduct its work in sessions, and adopt final decisions when the
 majority of SDC members were present. Decisions were approved by consensus, and the FRY President would issue the appropriate orders in his name. The Rules of Procedure of the SDC also provided for the possibility to make decisions and reach conclusions without holding a session, "on the basis of
 consultations among the SDC members". 

201.    Minutes were kept of sessions of the SDC. Those minutes, as well as the material for discussion and the stenographic records, constituted
 archival material. 

202.    On 30 June 1992, the SDC held its first session presided over by Dobrica Ćosić as FRY President. From that moment on, regular
 sessions of the SDC were held throughout the war. The Trial Chamber has carefully analysed the minutes and stenographic notes of the SDC sessions
 admitted into evidence related to the period of the Indictment. Among the topics discussed in these
 sessions were the military and political situation in the FRY, the logistic assistance to the VRS and
 SVK, military budget and military personnel issues. The details of these sessions will be discussed in subsequent parts of the Judgement addressing
 these relevant topics.


2. The FRY President

203.    According to the Law on the VJ, the FRY President commands the Army in war and peace, in conformity with the decisions of the SDC and shall:

1) establish the principles of internal organisation, the development and equipping of the Army;

2) determine the system of command in the Army and oversee its implementations;

3) decide on the deployment of the Army and approve the plan for its use;

4) regulate and order readiness of the Army in case of an imminent threat of war, state of war, or state of emergency;

5) provide guide-lines for arrangements relating to mobilisation and issue orders for the mobilisation of the Army;

6) issue basic regulations and other acts related to the deployment of the Army;

7) adopt rules regulating the internal order and relations in the performance of military service;

and

8) perform other duties relating to the command over the Army in accordance with federal law. 

204.    The FRY President was also vested with the power to exceptionally promote a professional officer to the rank of general at the proposal of the
 Chief of the VJ General Staff, and decided on other promotions. According to Article 136 of the Constitution, the FRY President should "appoint,
 promote and dismiss from service Army officers stipulated by federal law as well as the
 presidents and judges of military courts and military prosecutors". 


3. Chief of the VJ General Staff

205.    The Chief of the VJ General Staff was directly subordinated to the FRY President. Since the FRY President commanded the army pursuant to
 decisions taken by the SDC, the Chief of the VJ General Staff was also subordinated to the SDC. 

206.    The VJ General Staff was the "highest professional and staff organ" for the preparation and utilisation of the VJ in peace and war. The Chief
 of the VJ General Staff could engage the VJ in combat operations only pursuant to a decision to do so from the FRY President as Supreme Commander. He could, however, decide on the preparation and deployment of VJ units along the FRY borders. In this regard, Mladen Mihajlović testified that
 the role of the Chief of the VJ General Staff was to prepare the army, including material and equipment, for combat readiness, if it was necessary to
 defend the country. 

207.    Moreover, the Law on the VJ establishes that the Chief of the General Staff acts in "accordance with the basic principles of organisation,
 development and establishment of the Army and the documents issued by the President of the Republic". Within this framework the Chief of the General
 Staff shall:

1) determine the organisation, plan of development, and establishment of the commands, units, and institutions of the Army;

2) determine the plan of recruitment and maintenance of manpower levels for the Army and the numerical distribution of recruits in the Army;

3) issue regulations on the training of the Army;

4) determine plans for the education and advanced training of professional and reserve commanding officers;

5) perform other duties as stipulated by this Law. 



208.    According to Article 6 of the Law on the VJ, the Chief of the VJ General Staff issued orders, rules, commands, instructions or other acts for the
 execution of "enactments" of the FRY President, "as well as the duties stipulated by the Law on the VJ ". 

209.    The Chief of the VJ General Staff and the commanding officers of units or institutions designed by him had the power to appoint "officers,
 non-commissioned officers and soldiers" with the exception of "generals and commanding officers performing duties for which the rank of general had
 been determined". The Chief of the VJ General Staff could, however, make proposals for approval by the FRY President for the promotion of a
 professional officer to the rank of general. He could also transfer officers up to and including the rank of colonel, decide on the assignment of
 professional members of the VJ to duties outside the VJ and decide on termination of service of officers up to and including the rank of colonel. 

210.    In the first half of 1993, the Chief of the VJ General Staff was General Života Panić. On
 26 August 1993, Života Panić replaced Mile Mrškić as the Chief of the VJ Special Forces Corps and Borislav Vuković became the
 Chief of the VJ General Staff. 
4. Cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff

211.    The Chief of the VJ General Staff had a deputy and a cabinet which assisted him with his work. The cabinet included the Chef de Cabinet, the
 deputy Chef de Cabinet, and various other officers and assistants including, inter alia, an adjutant of the Chief of the VJ General Staff, legal and
 finance officers, as well as an information analyst. 

212.    The basic duties of the Chef de Cabinet included facilitating the work of the Chief of the VJ General Staff, which included receiving and sending
 out mail, processing and analysing documents,
 as well as all the organisational aspects related to the work of the Chief of the VJ General Staff. The cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff was also often responsible for relaying orders of the Chief of the VJ General Staff. 

213.    Through the so-called "managerial information system", the office monitored various issues from the printing of the daily newsletter about the
 situation in the units and the reserves to monitoring resources and finances. On average the office received between 50 and 300
 documents of all kinds daily. 
5. Structure of the VJ General Staff

214.    The VJ General Staff was made up of sectors, departments, administrations and other units. According to an organisational chart dated 15 June
 1993, the following organs were directly subordinated to the Chief of the VJ General Staff: the Sector for Operations; the Sector for Organization,
 Recruitment and Information; the Logistics Sector; the Personnel Administration; Information and Morale Department; the Security Administration; the
 Intelligence Administration;
 and VJ Inspection. Each organ was commanded by an Assistant to the Chief of the VJ General
 Staff. Among the functions of an Assistant was the provision of advice to the Chief of the VJ General Staff about their sector without having,
 however, any command over VJ units. 

215.    In December 1993, due to a reorganisation of the General Staff, the Intelligence Administration, previously an autonomous and independent
 organ, became the so called "2nd Administration" within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs. According to the new organisation, the
 following organs were directly subordinated to the VJ General Staff: the Sector for
 Operational and Staff Affairs; the Sector for Land Forces; the Sector for Air Force and Anti- Aircraft Defence; the Navy Sector; the Sector for
 Communications, Information and Electronic Operations; the Sector for Manning, Mobilization and Systemic Issues; the Logistics Sector; the
 Administration for Information and Political and Propaganda Activities; the Security
 Administration and the VJ Inspectorate. 



216.    The Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs was composed of a "1st Administration" which had the basic functions, inter alia, of "planning the
 engagement and combat readiness of the VJ"; "planning the development of the VJ"; ensuring the "State border security" and maintaining a "system of
 command and operations duty". Within this administration, there was also an Operations Centre, which collected and analysed information received
 from lower units deployed in the FRY, and from other federal organs within the FRY. During the time relevant to the
 Indictment, the Chief of the 1st Administration was Miodrag Simić. 

217.    The Intelligence Administration, or the "2nd Administration", was within the Sector for Operational and Staff Affairs. It was on 24-hour duty
 and responsible for intelligence support for the VJ, gathering information with indicators of possible aggression against the FRY. Siniša
 Borović testified that the Intelligence Administration was headed by General Krga. 

218.    The Security Administration included a counter-intelligence office whose function was the detection, monitoring, and prevention of all the factors
 that could threaten the VJ, such as activities of foreign intelligence agencies, terrorism or crime. It was also responsible for verifying the
 authenticity and reliability of intelligence that came through its administration. During the time
 relevant to the Indictment, the Security Administration was headed by Colonel Aleksander
 Dimitrijević. 

219.    The Logistics Sector of the VJ General Staff supplied the army with equipment and other military materials. It comprised, inter alia, a
 technical department ("Technical Administration"),
 an Operations Centre, and a planning organ. It was initially under the command of Vuković Đukić. However, after the transformations which took place in the second half of 1993, Milovanović and Šljivić were at the
 head of the Logistics Sector in sequence. 
(a) Collegium

220.    The VJ General Staff had a collegium, which was an advisory body convened from time to time to consider certain issues. The Chief of the VJ
 General Staff presided over the collegium which included the heads of the various sectors and independent administrations and occasionally their
 closest associates. 

221.    The collegium was convened generally on a weekly basis, but, if the need arose, meetings were held even more frequently. In addition to the
 regular meetings of the collegium, there were also the meetings of the so-called expanded collegium of the Chief of the VJ General Staff. Such
 meetings would be attended by the various army commanders. They were held around twice a year. 

222.    The collegium discussed general issues, dealing, in particular, with the military and political situation prevailing in the area, work plans and
 various specific problems. At the beginning of each collegium meeting, the Chief of the VJ General Staff was informed about the tasks issued during
 the previous collegium meeting and how they were implemented. Individual participants took the floor in a certain order and were given a certain
 time to brief the Chief of the VJ General Staff and present proposals to him. The meeting of the collegium ended with the Chief of General Staff
 issuing tasks and setting out deadlines for implementing them. The tasks were issued orally
 and subsequently processed in writing and minutes were kept.


6. Ministry of Defence
(a) Structure

223.    With the adoption of the FRY Constitution the MOD replaced the Federal Secretariat for National Defence. In the SFRY, the Federal Secretariat
 was superior to the General Staff. With the establishment of the FRY, the General Staff became independent of the MOD and the relationship between
 the two was based on coordination rather than a superior-subordinate relationship. 

224.    Several administrations or sectors were subordinated to the MOD. Among these organs was the "Sector for System and Status Issue and Legal
 Affairs", "Finance and Budget Administration" and "Material, Financial, and Market Inspection Sector". 

225.    The Sector for System and Status Issue and Legal Affairs was responsible for regulating the status of soldiers in the VJ, housing policy, the
 education of soldiers, salaries, allowances and other benefits in the VJ. 

226.    The Finance and Budget Administration was responsible for "monitoring the implementation of the military budget and in this regard, for proposing
 all necessary measures to ensure financial discipline and the regular flow of funds from the federal budget". It reported to the FRY Defence
 Minister and had to comply with the laws and regulations of the FRY Ministry of Finance. 

227.    The Material, Financial, and Market Inspection Sector carried out inspections regarding the storage, use, and disposition of the assets of the VJ.
 More specifically, it controlled the financial
 operations and checked the contracts involving procurement of material including food. This organ was also obliged to inspect the final calculation of the salaries in the Finance and Budget
 Administration at the accounting centre of the MOD. 

228.    The accounting centre in the MOD, directly connected to the Finance and Budget Administration, was responsible for collecting all relevant data on
 professional members of the army, calculating the salaries according to the specific regulations, as well as issuing salaries
 through GIRO accounts and settling payments to army suppliers. 
(b) Functions of the MOD

229.    Under the FRY Constitution the Minister of Defence was not a formal member of the SDC. Nevertheless, he took part in the work of the SDC when
 matters of exceptional importance in the domain of his ministry were discussed. 

230.    The MOD was in charge of the implementation of the defence plan enacted by the SDC. The Minister of Defence was entitled to adopt all kinds of enactments, orders and decisions related to the implementation of the defence policy. Proposals for such enactments as well as regulations to be adopted were submitted to the Minister of Defence by the specific organisational sectors. 

231.    The MOD was also obliged to implement decisions and enactments rendered by the President of FRY, the SDC, and the federal government. The MOD
 was responsible for carrying out inspections to check whether the enactments and laws relating to the defence of the country were being implemented in
 line with the law and the decisions of the SDC. If in the course of such inspection the MOD found out that there had been a breach of law, it would
 submit its report
 to the Minister of Defence as the person in charge of adopting certain measures as provided by the law. The Minister of Defence was responsible to the Prime Minister who in turn answered to the Assembly. 
(c) The Role of the MOD in the Military Budget

232.    The MOD was also responsible for executing the military budget, which included funds for both the MOD and the VJ. The military budget was a
 part of the federal budget prepared by the Federal Assembly. 

233.    The MOD was responsible for proposing and submitting a national defence budget to the FRY Assembly. This included a recommendation on the
 yearly budget for the VJ. In preparing the national defence budget, the Minister of Defence received budget proposals from the Chief of the VJ
 General Staff and the offices of the MOD. The Minister of Defence reviewed the budget proposals and, in particular with regard to the VJ budget
 plan, the MOD would discuss with the VJ General Staff whether the amount sought was realistic and thus would likely be approved by the FRY Assembly. 

234.    Generally, the needs of the army constituted around 85-90% of this budget, whereas the rest covered the needs of the MOD. After the Minister of
 Defence's endorsement of the proposed budget, it was then submitted to the federal government, which then established the final budget
 proposal to submit to the Federal Assembly for final approval. The annual budget of the MOD approved by the Federal Assembly, detailed the amounts which were to be allocated to the VJ and the MOD. 
C. Units of the VJ

235.    The FRY Constitution provided that the FRY should have an army, composed of Yugoslav citizens and which should "defend FRY sovereignty, territory,
 independence and constitutional order". 

236.    On 20 May 1992, the FRY Presidency adopted a decision on renaming the JNA as the Army of Yugoslavia ("VJ"). The Law on the VJ came into force
 in October 1993; Article 346 provides that JNA members became VJ members as of the date the law came into force. 

237.    Article 135 of the FRY Constitution provides that in peacetime and wartime the VJ was under the command of the FRY President, in accordance with
 decisions of the SDC. Under the Constitution, the SDC could reach command decisions to be implemented by the FRY President. 

238.    The VJ was divided into the following services: the Land Forces, the Air Forces and Anti- aircraft Defence and the Navy. These were in turn
 divided into "combat arms and supporting arms" and those, in turn, were divided into sections and specialist services. 

239.    Within the VJ, special military formations were also established, such as the Special Units Corps ("KSJ"). The KSJ was directly subordinated to
 the Chief of the VJ General Staff. The KSJ consisted of the Guards Motorised Brigade ("Guards Brigade"), 72nd Special Brigade, 63rd
 Parachute Brigade, 1st Armoured Brigade and Headquarters Support Units. 


1. The Guards Brigade

240.    The Guards Brigade consisted of six battalions (1st Guards Motorised Battalion, 2nd Guards Motorised Battalion, 25 Military Police Battalion,
 Anti-Aircraft Defence Light Self-Propelled Artillery Rocket Battalion, Anti-Aircraft Howitzer Battalion 122mm and Logistic Battalion), two companies
 (Communications Company and Engineering Company) and three platoons (Atomic Biological Chemical Defence Platoon, Military Police Special Purposes
 Platoon and Special
 Transportation Platoon). The duties of the Guards Brigade were primarily related to security
 rather than to combat activities. During peacetime, the Guards Brigade had three main duties - training, securing combat readiness and "protocol
 duties", which involved providing security to installations or residencies; whereas in war time, its main duty was to provide security to the
 Supreme Command. 

241.    In 1993, the Guards Brigade numbered about 1600 members. Based on the selection criteria for its officers, it was considered an elite unit. Witness Borivoje Tešić testified that in December 1993, he was an operations officer within the staff of the Guards Brigade, and also that,
 at one point, Major Paunović was an operations officer in the Guards Brigade. 
2. The 72nd Special Brigade

242.    The 72nd Brigade was an elite military unit made up of "contract soldiers" to conduct special operations. The 72nd Brigade was composed of
 three battalions: a military police battalion for special operations which was headquartered on Mount Avala, about 30 kilometres from Belgrade, a
 sabotage battalion located in Pančevo as well as an assault battalion based in Vukovine. Each battalion had two professional companies
 consisting of professional soldiers, and one company of
 regular conscripts maintaining the compound. Some training of the military police battalion took place at Bubanj Potok, about 15 kilometres from Avala, as well as parachute training at Niš. Tešić testified that, at one point, Miodrag Panić was commander of the 72nd Brigade. 
D. Military Judicial System in the FRY
1. Structure and jurisdiction
(a) Military courts

243.    The dissolution of the SFRY and the establishment of the FRY brought about a reorganisation of the military judicial system. The FRY had
 independent judicial organs with offices in Belgrade, Tivat and in Niš. According to witness Radomir Gojović, those organs did not have
 any functional relationship with the military judiciary in RS and the RSK. 

244.    The military courts had jurisdiction over military personnel for all criminal offences and over civilians or other non-military personnel for
 specific criminal offences listed in the Law on Military Courts. 

245.    The military courts applied the SFRY Criminal Code which remained in force in the FRY as well as the "Regulations on the Application of
 International Laws of War in the Armed Forces of the SFRY ("Regulations"). The latter included, inter alia, a provision on command responsibility with
 respect to war crimes and regulated committing, organising, inciting or assisting in the
 commission of a crime according to international humanitarian law. The Trial Chamber also
 notes that a breach of the Regulations in some less serious cases was characterised as a violation of military discipline under the Law on the VJ. 



246.    Military judges were appointed by decree of the FRY President, upon proposal of the Minister of Defence. 
(b) Military disciplinary courts

247.    All disciplinary violations were dealt with by military disciplinary courts. A violation of military discipline consisted of behaviour that was
 contrary to the obligation of performance of military duty stipulated by the law, the rules of service, and other regulations, orders and other
 documents of superior officers concerning service. 

248.    The Law on the VJ defined disciplinary infractions and offences and the procedures applicable in addressing these disciplinary breaches. The Law
 on the VJ regulated, inter alia, the composition of the military disciplinary courts, as well as the authority and procedure for superior officers to
 deal with disciplinary offences. 

249.    More specifically, the military disciplinary courts had jurisdictions over two types of breaches of military discipline: disciplinary infractions,
 which were minor violations of military discipline, and disciplinary offences which were serious violations of the law governing military
 discipline. Radomir Gojović further explained that one act might constitute both a disciplinary
 violation and a crime. In this case, parallel proceedings - disciplinary and criminal - could be
 undertaken and the military authority could pass a sentence for disciplinary offences independently of the criminal proceeding. 

250.    In the case of a disciplinary infraction, the sanction that could be imposed included military detention for up to 20 days, loss of rank and
 decrease of pay between 5% and 10% for up to two months. As regards disciplinary offences, the measures that could be imposed included
 suspension of promotion, decrease in pay between 10% and 20% for a period between one and 12
 months, a prison term for up to 20 days, dismissal from duty for a military commander with a ban on reinstatement to this duty between one and three years, loss of the right to serve as a professional soldier, and loss of rank. 

251.    In the case of a disciplinary infraction, the statute of limitations was three months from the day it was committed. With regard to a
 disciplinary offence, the statute of limitations was six months from the day a superior learned of its commission. In the case of a disciplinary
 offence that also constituted a criminal act, the statute of limitations in the Criminal Code for the criminal act was applied. The Criminal Code
 provided for the inapplicability of the statute of limitations
 where the underlying disciplinary offence was a violation of international humanitarian law. 

252.    The military disciplinary courts existed at two levels: military disciplinary courts of first instance and higher military disciplinary court. Military disciplinary courts of first instance were established at the level of the General Staff and Commands of the Army, Air Force and Anti-
 Aircraft Defence, and the Navy. The higher military disciplinary court, charged with appeals, was established at the General Staff. 

253.    The Chief of the VJ General Staff appointed the military disciplinary presidents, judges, prosecutors and their deputies, as well as the
 registrars of the military disciplinary courts for terms of two years. 
2. The procedure for criminal and disciplinary violations

254.    In relation to war crimes, a VJ officer who learned of a violation of the laws of war, should "order that the circumstances and facts surrounding
 the violation be investigated and the necessary evidence collected". The VJ officer should also forward such information to the Military
 Prosecutor. Any senior or commanding officer had to prevent further violations and was also
 under an obligation "to take measures to make sure that the perpetrator of a crime … should be taken into custody to prevent him from
 absconding". 



255.    Once the Military Prosecutor received information as to the commission of a crime, he or she would then assess if there were grounds to initiate
 further proceedings and to move the case before the investigative judge. The Military Prosecutor could request an investigation through
 certain state organs including military police and security organs. 

256.    The Chief of the VJ General Staff could set up a commission with the task of preparing a report on the circumstances surrounding a violation of
 the laws of war. The Chief of the VJ General Staff could also vest the commission with specific tasks such as establishing individual responsibility
 for the violations, proposing initiatives for the prevention of future similar violations, and taking disciplinary measures against those responsible
 of the violations. However, the
 official investigation rested within the purview of the Military Courts. 

257.    Proceedings against a perpetrator of a disciplinary offence could be brought before a military disciplinary court by a senior officer holding the
 position of, at least, regiment commander. In the FRY MOD, that was either the Federal Minister of Defence and commanding officers of the units
 directly subordinated to him; whereas in the VJ, it was at least an Army commander, naturally also including the Chief of the VJ General Staff. 

258.    In this regard, witness Miodrag Starčević testified that Vuković was responsible for initiating investigations of General Staff
 officers directly subordinated to him without there being an intermediary superior. Likewise, if Vuković's subordinates failed to initiate a
 disciplinary
 investigation for a known violation, he could initiate such an investigation. 

259.    Depending on the outcome of the investigation, the officer who initiated the proceedings would stay the proceedings, pronounce a disciplinary
 sentence or forward the case to the competent officer who would file charges against the violator before the military disciplinary court. 
3. Jurisdiction over crimes committed abroad

260.    The Trial Chamber heard evidence that the Law on the VJ was binding upon the members of
 the Personnel Centres ("PCs"). Furthermore, Defence witness Radomir Gojović testified that a VJ superior officer was required to carry out necessary inquiries and take the necessary measures in case of war crimes being committed by a VJ unit
 deployed outside the FRY territory. Once the offender was in the custody of the FRY organs, the superior officer also had a duty to report to the
 Military Prosecutor, who was in charge of the criminal proceedings. 

261.    Vuković's ability to initiate disciplinary investigations against some VJ members serving in the VRS or the SVK through the 30th and the 40th
 PCs will be discussed in detail in a different part of the Judgement. 
E. Structure and Organisation of the Army of Republika Srpska ("VRS")
1. Establishment of the VRS

262.    The VRS was formally established on 12 May 1992 at the 16th Session of the Assembly of the Serb People of BiH and was abolished on 31 December
 2001. On 12 May 1992, the Constitution was also amended to vest the President of the Republic with the power to lead the VRS, in peace as well as in
 war time. 

263.    The VRS was created by combining what remained of the JNA after its withdrawal from the BiH with the various "Territorial Defence (TO),
 municipal and paramilitary units that were then fighting in Bosnia". General Kadijević, a Chief of Staff in the JNA in 1992, commented on the
 role of the JNA in the creation of the VRS: "The JNA commands and units constituted the
 backbone of the VRS , with its entire arsenal of weapons and military equipment". 



264.    Right after its establishment, the VRS did not have specific uniforms, but from June 1992 a decision was made whereby the insignia of a tri-colour
 flag were to be worn on the sleeves and the hats. 
2. Hierarchy in the VRS

265.    On 1 June 1992, the Presidency of RS adopted the Law on the VRS. The Law provided that the VRS operated under the principle of unity or
 singleness of command and defined its objective as defending the "sovereignty, territory, independence and constitutional order" of RS. It also stipulated that the President of RS was Commander-in-Chief of the Army and held the authority to, inter alia, establish a system of VRS command
 and to appoint, promote or discharge military officers within the VRS. In addition, the Law on the VRS stipulated that the Commander of the Main
 Staff would command the Army in compliance with the authority delegated to him by the President. Based on the principle of unity of command, the
 Commander of the VRS Main
 Staff was directly subordinated to the Commander-in-Chief. 

266.    During the period relevant to the Indictment, Radovan Karad`ić was the Commander-in- Chief of the VRS and Ratko Mladić was the
 Commander of the Main Staff. 
(i)RS Supreme Command

267.    While the President of RS was the Commander-in-Chief of the VRS, the broader issues
 related to strategic aims of war were however dealt with by the Supreme Command. The body was created in November 1992 and consisted of the President of the RS, the Vice President, the
 Speaker of the Assembly, the Minister of Defence and the Minister of the Interior. 

268.    Although the Minister of Defence was a member of the Supreme Command, he was not in the VRS chain of command. The role of the MOD was to manage
 the "activities that were necessary to ensure the viability of the Army as an effective institution" and the administration of the Military Court
 System. 
(ii)Main Staff

269.    The Main Staff was the highest military organ in the VRS and operated under the direction of the RS Supreme Command. 

270.    The Main Staff made operational, logistical, security and administrative decisions for the VRS, as well as decisions aimed at harmonising military
 activities "with the ongoing political and diplomatic efforts undertaken by other branches of the RS government". 
a. Organisation

271.    According to Butler's expert report, the nucleus of the Main Staff of the VRS originated from the components and personnel of the former JNA 2nd
 Military District. It was "modelled to
 closely parallel the staff organisation of the former JNA corps". 



272.    The VRS Main Staff leadership was comprised of the Commander of the Main Staff, the Chief of Staff of the Main Staff, the Assistant Commander for
 Morale, Religious and Legal Affairs, the Assistant Commander for Logistics and the Assistant Commander for Intelligence and Security. The Chief of
 Staff of the Main Staff managed the work of the Main Staff and ensured that it was
 coordinated with the work of the other sectors. 

273.    At the time relevant to the Indictment, Ratko Mladić's subordinates were: Manojlo Milovanović as the Chief of Staff and Deputy
 Commander, when necessary; Milan Gvero as Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs who also served as the principal
 representative of the Main Staff to the Assembly of Serbian People in BiH, once General Mladić had withdrawn from attending the sessions in
 1993; Đorđe Đukić as Assistant Commander for Logistics and Zdravko Tolimir as Assistant Commander for Intelligence and
 Security. In addition, Ljubiša Beara was the head of Security within the Intelligence and Security sector; Mićo Grubor was Chief of Mobilisation Organisation; and Radivoje Miletić was Chief of Administration for Operations and Staff Affairs in
 the Operations Sector and later Chief of Operations and Training of the VRS Main Staff in March 1995. 

274.    The Main Staff was initially located in the former JNA premises in Crna Rijeka. In December 1992, however, when the personnel level increased, a
 rear command post of the Main Staff was created in the Hotel Gora in Han Pijesak. In July 1995, the Main Staff's headquarters
 were in Han Pijesak and the forward command post ("IKM") was in Bijeljina. As of 11 July 1995, the IKM of the Main Staff was co-located with the IKM of the Drina Corps in the Bratunac Brigade command post. 
b. Decision Making Process

275.    As a rule the meetings of the VRS Main Staff were chaired by the VRS Main Staff Commander. Decisions were taken by Mladić and at times by
 Milovanović, Tolimir and Miletić. Accordingly, they were always made on the basis of General Mladić's ideas. 

276.    According to the VRS Main Staff "Analysis of the combat readiness and activities of the VRS in 1992", decisions on the engagement of the VRS were
 taken at meetings of the Main Staff, with the active participation of the Chief of Staff, the Assistant Commanders, the heads of
 departments and the heads of combat arms, as well as a number of commanding officers. The
 VRS Main Staff issued directives for the use of the armed forces, which would also allow "the creative potentials of the commanders and their bodies in
 the subordinate commands to come to full expression". The evidence however shows that in fact Mladić ran the VRS on a "centralised
 orders-based system". According to Rupert Smith, Mladić issued very detailed orders which gave
 very little latitude at the operational level. Another witness stated that in relation to specific operations to be carried out by individual corps
 most of the time Mladić would issue orders directly during a visit to the relevant Corps. On such occasions, Mladić often participated in
 and monitored the works of the commands, and frequently took direct command over the operations. 
3. VRS Units

277.    The VRS consisted of five combat Corps formations, each of which consisted of about 25.000 to 50.000 soldiers. Each corps had five to seven brigades, which consisted of 3.000 to 5.000 soldiers; each brigade was divided into battalions of 500 to 700 soldiers and each battalion was divided into five or six companies with approximately
 100 soldiers. 

278.    The VRS operated in almost all respects in the same manner as the former JNA and its five Corps were geographically based and assumed the
 formations as the former JNA Corps. These Corps were formally established in June 1992 and were the 1st Krajina Corps (formerly the JNA 5th Corps), the 2nd Krajina Corps (formerly the
 JNA 10th Corps), the East Bosnia Corps (formerly the JNA 17th Corps), the Sarajevo-Romanija Corps (formerly the JNA 4th Corps), the Herzegovina Corps
 (consisting of elements of the former JNA 9th Corps). The Drina Corps was formed at a later stage, 
		on 1 November 1992. The Corps were
 subordinated to the Main Staff. 

279.    In addition, there were a few independent units, such as the 10th Reconnaissance Sabotage
 Detachment and the 65th Protection Regiment subordinate to the VRS Main Staff. 

280.    The Corps had a similar structure as the Main Staff, with a Corps Commander and Corps Chief of Staff, who also held the position of Deputy
 Commander, as well as three Assistant Commanders with responsibility, respectively, for Intelligence and Security, Rear (Logistics) Services and
 Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs. 

281.    The Chief of Staff was the "principal advisor to the Corps Commander, and the primary facilitator through which sic the Commander's intent, orders
 and directives were organized and
 processed for execution by the Corps Staff and subordinate unites". He was the only one who, in keeping with the Commander's decisions, had the right to give orders to the subordinates. The Chief of Staff also directed the Corps Staff, dealing
 with all day-to-day administration of the Corps' activities. 

282.    The brigade leadership included a Brigade Commander and a Brigade Chief of Staff who also acted as Deputy Commander. The VRS brigades'
 leadership also included assistant commanders for Intelligence and Security, Rear (Logistics) Services and of Morale, 
		Legal and Religious Affairs. 
a. Drina Corps

283.    The VRS Main Staff established the Drina Corps on 1 November 1992. The personnel that formed the Drina Corps mostly came from the East Bosnia
 Corps and the Sarajevo-Romanija Corps, as well as from the VRS Main Staff. Its headquarters was established in Han Pijesak and later moved to
 Sarajevo. The Drina Corps' area of responsibility covered east BiH on the border with FRY along the Drina River and covered, inter alia, the
 municipalities of Zvornik, Bratunac, Sarajevo, Vlasenica, Han Pijesak and Žepa. 

284.    Milenko Živanović assumed the command of the Drina Corps at the time of its formation in November 1992. Radislav Krstić was the
 Chief of Staff from August 1994 and became Corps Commander in the early evening hours of 13 July 1995. With Krstić's appointment, Svetozar
 Andrić was appointed as the Chief of Staff. 





285.    Vujadin Popović was Assistant Commander for Security; 
		Slobodan Cerović was Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and Religious Affairs;
 and Lazar Aćamović was Assistant Commander for Rear Services 
		(Logistics). 

286.    The Drina Corps consisted of the 1st Zvornik Infantry Brigade, the 1st Sarajevo Light Infantry Brigade, the 1st Sekovići (or Birač)
 Infantry Brigade, the 1st Milići Light Infantry Brigade, the 1st Bratunac Light Infantry Brigade, the 2nd Romanija Motorized Brigade, the 1st
 Podrinje Light Infantry Brigade, the 5th Podrinje Light Infantry Brigade, the 5th Mixed Artillery Regiment, the 5th Military Police Battalion, the 5th
 Engineer Battalion, the 5th Communications Battalion, the 1st Skelani Separate 
		Infantry Battalion, the 
		Sarajevo Brigade as well as a unit called
 Drina Wolves. 

287.    From 12 December 1992 until November 1996, 
		Vinko Pandurević was the Commander of the 
		Zvornik Brigade. Dragan Obrenović was the Chief
 of Staff, Dragan Jokić the Chief of Engineering and Drago Nikolić the Assistant 
		Commander for Security. 

288.    The Bratunac Light Infantry Brigade was formally organised on 14 November 1992 with Borivoje Tešić 
		appointed as its first 
		Commander. On 25 May 1995, Vidoje Blagojević was appointed as the Commander of the Bratunac Brigade and retained such position until 
		mid-1996. .
 Momir Nikolić was Assistant Commander for Security and 
		Intelligence. 



289.    The Drina Wolves Unit was an elite combat formation, which was formally subordinated to the Zvornik Infantry 
		Brigade. It was considered as the
 assault battalion of the Drina Corps and was known as a unit with the best-trained and fittest soldiers in the Drina 
		Corps. 
b. Sarajevo-Romanija Corps ("SRK")

290.    The SRK was located in the greater 
		Sarajevo area, with its headquarters based at 
		Lukavica. The SRK's main forces were positioned around the
 inner ring of Sarajevo, in particular in the area of Ilidža, Ned`arići and 
		Grbavica. Until the end of 1992, seven SRK brigades were
 positioned in that part of the confrontation lines constituting the "inner ring", whose length was some 55 
		kilometres. Auxiliary forces of the SRK
 were positioned on the so-called exterior ring of
 the Sarajevo front, whose length was approximately 180 
		kilometres. In 1992, the SRK held the
 Lukavica barracks, Ned`arići, Mojmilo hill and the airport - the latter until July 1992 when it was taken over by 
		UNPROFOR. By late 1992, the
 SRK was "fully dedicated to maintaining the blockade around 
		Sarajevo". 

291.    Stanislav Galić was the Commander of the 
		SRK from 10 September 1992 until 10 August
 1994. He was succeeded by Dragomir Milošević, his Chief of Staff from 6 July 
		1993. Milošević retained command of the SRK until
 on or about 21 November 
		1995. As SRK Corps Commander, both Galić and Milošević were immediately subordinated to the Commander of the
 VRS Main
 Staff and the Commander-in-Chief of the
		VRS. 
4. Judicial Military System

292.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that in July 1995, a functioning judicial system existed within the VRS to address criminal or
 disciplinary matters related to members of the 
		VRS. 

293.    The Law on the VRS regulated the criminal and disciplinary liability of its members and the duty of VRS senior or superior officers to ensure
 proper military conduct through disciplinary measures and 
		court-martials. With specific reference to criminal offences, the Law on the VRS
 stipulated that provisions of the "Criminal Law and other laws" were applicable to the military 
		personnel. The SFRY Criminal Law, which was in force
 in the RS in 1995, prohibited violations of international humanitarian law. 
		This prohibition was directed at all RS citizens, including members of the
 VRS. Moreover, pursuant to an order of 13 May 1992 by President Radovan Karadžić, 
		the VRS was required to comply with the obligations under
 international humanitarian 
		law. Accordingly, if a commander in the VRS became aware of a violation of international law of war, he had a duty to
 report that up the chain of command. 
		If a violation was reported to the corps commander, the commander was obliged to initiate proceedings and send a
 report to the military prosecutor. Information on such violations was also included in regular 
		reports. 
F. [Omitted – not relevant for the appeal]


V. FINDINGS ON THE CRIMES
A. Sarajevo
1. The City of Sarajevo

303.    The city of Sarajevo lies alongside the Miljacka River and is situated in a natural valley surrounded on all sides by high hills allowing it to be overlooked with ease. Before the conflict, it consisted of ten municipalities: Stari Grad (Old Town), Centar (Centre), Novo Sarajevo, Novi Grad, Vogošća, Ilidža, Pale, Ilijaš, Hadžići and Trnovo. By 1992, Sarajevo had grown into an important political, cultural, industrial and commercial centre of BiH. 

304.    Before the conflict, the population of the city approximated over half a million residents, with the following ethnic distribution: 49.4% Bosnian Muslims, 27.8% Bosnian Serbs and 7.1% Bosnian Croats. 
2. The Siege Unfolds
(a) Basics of the Siege

305.    One of the six strategic objectives of the Bosnian Serb leadership was to partition Sarajevo into Serbian and Muslim sectors and establish a separate state authority for each sector. The demographics of the city, however, demonstrate that while the urban part of Sarajevo was ethnically mixed, the surrounding hills were largely inhabited by Serbs. Therefore, any concept of partition would more likely result in the encirclement of a predominately Muslim centre surrounded by Serbian areas. Such a reality was in fact discussed at the RS Assembly. In addition, the Bosnian Serb leaders viewed the siege of Sarajevo as necessary to prevent the functioning of the
government of BiH, and as a “critical collective hostage”, to be used to attain significant concessions from the BiH Government and from the international community. 
(b) Chronology of the Siege

306.    Tensions between Serbs and Muslims in Sarajevo mounted between February and March
1992, resulting in the establishment of barricades and checkpoints by both sides. The EC recognition of BiH as an independent state on 7 April 1992 sparked a wave of violence within Sarajevo. This marked the start of the siege of Sarajevo, which is estimated to have lasted from April 1992 to November 1995. 

307.    As of June 1992, heavy shelling and sniping from the SRK against the whole of the city were daily events. Between September and December 1992, Sarajevo was exposed to intense shelling. This prompted the UNSC in December 1992 to strongly condemn the attacks on Sarajevo and demand their immediate cessation. In August 1993, a Demilitarised Zone (“DMZ”) was established in Sarajevo based upon an agreement between UNPROFOR, the ABiH and the VRS. Nevertheless, the violence in Sarajevo continued unabated throughout 1993 until February
1994. This led the UNSC to again strongly condemn the violence and demand the “immediate end to attacks against Sarajevo which have resulted in a high number of civilian casualties, seriously disrupted essential services and aggravated an already severe humanitarian situation”. 

308.    Following the shelling of the Markale market in February 1994, a Total Exclusion Zone
(“TEZ”) was created within a 20 kilometre radius from the city centre. This stipulated that all weapons of a calibre higher than 12.7mm be removed from the zone, or turned over to designated
UN Weapons Collection Points. Despite the creation of the TEZ, there were instances of large calibre weapons being used by the VRS. 

309.    In August 1994, UNPROFOR responded to more frequent instances of sniping against the population of Sarajevo by negotiating an anti-sniping agreement between the VRS and the ABiH. A few days after the agreement was signed, D. Milošević reported to UNPROFOR that he had issued an order to the SRK troops to stop all sniping activity in the city of Sarajevo. The sniping against civilians by the SRK, however, did not fully stop. 

310.    Shelling and sniping intensified again between November and December 1994 and between April and May 1995, despite a ceasefire being in effect. During these periods, the firing of small arms reached 3,000 rounds per day at times. Although both sides kept weapons inside the city in violation of the TEZ, MP-72 observed that the VRS had “far more” large calibre weapons than the ABiH, even after the TEZ was established. Witnesses also testified that the shelling and sniping against the population in Sarajevo by the SRK was often linked to events occurring elsewhere in
BiH, such as an ABiH attack against the VRS outside of Sarajevo and the crisis in Gora`de in April
1994. 

311.    In May 1995, the situation in Sarajevo deteriorated. TEZ violations increased and after a day marked by an intense artillery exchange, it was clear that any ceasefire was “really over”. Per Anton Brennskag, a Sector Sarajevo UNMO, testified that in June 1995, the SRK fired up to 150 artillery and mortar rounds per day in Sarajevo, hitting both military and civilian targets. During the same time, UNPROFOR reported that their personnel and locations were being targeted by Serb
mortar fire. On 16 June 1995, the ABiH launched an attack to break the encirclement of Sarajevo,
which after initial success failed, causing heavy casualties for the ABiH. The siege ended in
November 1995. 
(c) Comparison of Forces during the Siege

312.    Following the initial six weeks of fighting in 1992, confrontation lines changed very little during the remainder of the conflict. The SRK had its headquarters in Lukavica and was positioned around the so-called inner ring of Sarajevo, which was about 55 kilometres long, while auxiliary SRK forces were positioned along the so-called exterior ring of the Sarajevo front, which was about 180 kilometres long. In particular, along the inner ring, the SRK controlled-areas
included Ilidža, Neđarići, part of Grbavica, Vraca, Mount Trebević and Špicasta Stijena. 

313.    The 1st Corps of the ABiH was headquartered in the centre of Sarajevo and had approximately 40,000 to 45,000 soldiers. At the end of 1994, the total number fell to between
35,000 and 40,000. The ABiH controlled part of Mount Igman, Mount Žuć the eastern part of the city of Sarajevo, including very densely-populated parts, such as the area of Stari Grad and Centar, part of Grbavica, and the southwestern part of the city, Hrasnica, Sokolović, Kolonija, Dobrinja and Butmir, and the hills in the north of Sarajevo. In the Grbavica area, the Miljacka River constituted the northern confrontation line, with the ABiH positioned north of the river and
the SRK south of the river. 

314.    In describing the ABiH soldiers’ presence in Sarajevo, Martin Bell testified that “they were deployed obviously … round the edges. … you would sometimes find them billeted in schools, but you were not aware of a -- living in a city with … a standing army in it”. He further stated that Sarajevo “looked like a ruined city, but … not a militarised one in any obvious way”. 

315.    The SRK was regarded as militarily superior to the ABiH in terms of artillery and quantities of heavy weaponry, such as tanks, armoured personnel carriers and rockets. MP-72 testified that proportionately, the SRK had “far more weapons, far more sort of large calibre weapons than the ABiH ” and that “far more weapons were fired by the Serbs”. 

316.    In terms of artillery, the SRK used almost predominantly 120mm and 150mm mortar shells, but there is evidence they also possessed 81mm or 82mm shells. In 1995, the SRK also started using modified air-bombs. The SRK also relied heavily on sniper units equipped with precision rifles that could hit targets up to 800 metres away. 

317.    In contrast, the ABiH was generally more lightly equipped, though towards the end of the war it did find ways of acquiring more anti-tank weapons. The ABiH was known to mainly use
81mm mortars, but was not in possession of modified air-bombs. 

318.    Though both sides were involved in sniping, MP-409 stated that the VRS used more snipers throughout the course of the conflict. 
3. Methods of Warfare
(a) Overview

319.    The SRK subjected the city of Sarajevo to extensive gunfire and heavy shelling throughout the conflict without sparing civilian residential areas. In addition, the city’s natural topography, such as ridges and high-rise buildings, provided vantage-points for the SRK to target civilians moving around the city. Mladić – described by a witness as the “strategist” of the siege – stated that he held “the city in his palm”. 

320.    Martin Bell described the siege as if “the Great War were being refought in a modern urban environment”. During the war, the civilian population was deliberately targeted and subjected to immense hardships that served no military purpose. No civilian activity and no area of Sarajevo seemed to be safe from sniping or shelling attacks from SRK-held territory. Civilians were targeted during funerals, in ambulances, in hospitals, on trams, on buses, when driving or cycling, at
home, while tending gardens or fires or clearing rubbish in the city, in gathering points, such as markets, sports events or while queuing for food and water. The Sarajevo State Hospital received more than 100 patients every day and the ratio of civilian to military patients was about 4:1. 

321.    The “endless” killing of civilians and the deprivation of water, food, electricity, gas, medicines and humanitarian aid all had a devastating effect on Sarajevo’s residents. They lived
under the daily threat of injury and death from shells and sniper fire. Whenever they ventured out
to get food or water, they would strive to find sheltered areas and would stay behind containers as much as possible to shield themselves from sniper fire and shells. 

322.    The physical damage to Sarajevo was immense, extending from housing blocks to hospitals and religious and historical buildings. The damage was also exacerbated by the fact that the SRK used phosphorus incendiary shells that could set an entire building on fire. Attempts to extinguish fires caused by the shellings often proved ineffective, as the water supply was often interrupted and the fire fighters themselves were often subjected to gunfire. 
(b) Shelling

323.    There is evidence that on average, the SRK fired more than 100 rounds of artillery, mortar and modified air bombs in Sarajevo on any single day. The shelling throughout the siege involved over 2 million shells and was highly organised. General John Wilson, Chief of UNMO until November 1992, personally observed shelling in Sarajevo and testified that as of June 1992, heavy shelling was a daily event and directed at the entire city. A 1994 report of a UN Commission of Experts cited estimates by UNPROFOR and city officials that the daily shelling ranged from 200 to 300 impacts of a quiet day to 800 to 1,000 on an active day. 

324.    Mortars were very precise, both in terms of direction and radius of impact, with a margin of error of less than 40 metres. In contrast, modified air bombs were notoriously imprecise, as guiding systems could not be attached to these bombs. It was therefore impossible to direct them or adequately predict where they would impact. The SRK used two types of modified air-bombs to
shell Sarajevo: the FAB-100 and the FAB-250. Defence witness Ivan Ðukić, a technical engineer
who was involved in the development on the modified air-bomb, testified that the use of modified air bombs in an urban environment was “totally inappropriate”. Similarly, UNMO Thomas Knustad stated that the use of modified air bombs served no military purpose. 

325.    SRK mortar positions included Mrkovići, Trebević, Zlatište, Vraca, Gravica Brdo, Nedžarići barracks, Paljevo plateau and from within the Polinje area. In particular, Sarajevo Old Town was targeted from the south-western side of Mount Trebević. The Nedžarići barracks provided a strong vantage point for the shelling of the Alipašino Polje area. Shells fired from Mrkovići would more commonly target the upper part of Sarajevo in the Stari Grad and Centar municipalities. Hrasnica, Butmir and Skolovići were shelled primarily from SRK positions between Ilidža/Blažuj and the Lukavica barracks. The lower part of Sarajevo was a clear target
from the Paljevo plateau. The centre of Sarajevo was a target from the Polinje area. Lastly, the
entire area of Dobrinja in Sarajevo was targeted from a VRS strong-hold in Gravica Brdo and
Nedžarići. 

326.    The SRK shelling of Sarajevo was indiscriminate and resulted in mostly civilian victims. Shelling targets generally had no clear military value and included apartment blocks, schools, hospitals, food queues and historical buildings. The Holiday Inn, for example, came under frequent shelling between the period 10 September 1992 and mid-1994. 
(c) Sniping

327.    Expert witness Van der Weijden explained that conventionally, the traditional military sniper operates in a shooter/spotter team in order to maximise the accuracy of the shot. The term “sniper”, however, has evolved and is now commonly used to refer to shooters who operate alone. Particularly, since the siege of Sarajevo, the term sniper is used to indicate a shooter who fires at
whoever he gets in his sight. 

328.    There is evidence that between late 1994 and early 1995, VRS snipers began to utilise 12.7 calibre M87 machine guns, instead of the conventional 7.92 calibre Zastava M76 or 7.62 calibre SVD Dragunov. While the M87 machine gun had the capacity to cover a larger effective range, it was notorious for its indiscriminate destructiveness and lack of precision. According to Van der Weijden, the 7.92 or 7.62 calibre guns also lacked precision when the range sought extended
beyond 800 metres. He also testified that, with regard to targets travelling in trams, it would be
“almost impossible” for SRK snipers to accurately distinguish between military and civilian personnel, and furthermore, that a shot should never be taken when the target cannot be identified “because of the risk of shooting a non-combatant”. 

329.    According to Derviša Selmanović, every hill around Sarajevo was used as a vantage point for Serb snipers to shoot into the city. Areas that became known as notorious sniper positions from which civilians were targeted included Grbavica, the Jewish Cemetery, the Orthodox Church, the School for the Blind and the areas of Neñarići, Špicasta Stijena, Mount Trebević and Baba Stijena. According to Kučanin, sniping fire frequently originated from Grdonj Brdo, Sedrenik, Gornji Kovačići, the Ozrenska Street, Zagorska Street, Milinkladska Street, Miroslava Krleze Street and Kromolj. In Kučanin’s view, the largest number of sniping attacks against the city came from the “Death Sowers” in Osmiće, and from the Vraca area. 

330.    The Trial Chamber heard numerous witnesses regarding the frequent and indiscriminate nature of sniping in Sarajevo during the course of the conflict, and moreover, took judicial notice of the fact that between September 1992 and August 1994, civilians were shot nearly every day as VRS gunners fired indiscriminately into the city. Several witnesses testified that all of the intersections along the main streets of Sarajevo were well-known targets. Marshall Tito Boulevard was known as “Sniper Alley” and other locations, such as the areas of Zamario Street, Džemala Bijedića Street, Ivana Krndelja and Miljenka Cvitković Streets were commonly targeted. Trams were commonly shot at on Zmaja od Bosne Street around the Holiday Inn, where they were forced to slow down by a switch in the tracks at a point in the line of sight of VRS snipers positioned on the south bank of the Miljacka river or in the Metalka building. 

331.    The area from Tršćanska Street, known as the “running street”, all the way up to the Bratstvo-Jedinstvo bridge was notoriously dangerous for civilians. Another notable target was “Igman Road”, a road which ran over Mount Igman through Hrasnica into Sarajevo. This road
was used to transport supplies into Sarajevo and according to Turković, there were no ABiH
positions along the Igman Road. Thorbjørn Øvergård and his team in Hrasnica observed civilians being fired upon from the SRK-held area of Ilidža as they travelled on this road. 

332.    Bruurmijn testified that the majority of the sniping victims he examined were children or elderly people who were clearly non-combatants. 871 In an effort to protect the population, UNPROFOR eventually placed metal barriers and barricades at important intersections and crossroads around Sarajevo. 

333.    Significantly, MP-72 testified that the sniping of civilians was a “permanent threat” and, as such, was part of the overall strategy of the Bosnian Serbs to terrorise the civilian population of Sarajevo. 

334.    The Trial Chamber will now examine the specific Scheduled Shelling and Sniping Incidents, representative of the alleged unlawful killings, inhumane acts and attacks against the civilian
population in Sarajevo.
4. Scheduled Shelling Incidents
(a) 22 January 1994 (Incident A1)
(i) Indictment





22 January 1994: Three mortar shells landed in the area of Alipašino Polje, the first in a park behind, and the second and third in front of residential apartment buildings at 3, Geteova Street (previously Centinjska Street) and at 4, Bosanka Street (previously Klara Cetkin Street), where children were playing. The second and third shells killed six children under the age of 15 years and wounded one adult and at least three such children. The origin of fire was from VRS-held
territory approximately to the west. 




(ii) Incident

335.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the following facts. Around noon on 22 January
1994, three mortar shells (two 82mm and one 120mm calibre) were fired into the residential neighbourhood of Alipašino Polje in the west of Sarajevo and six children were killed by the explosions and another three children, including Muhamed Kapetanović, and Goran Todorović, who were ten and 12 years old at the time were wounded. One adult (Witness AI in the Galić case) was also seriously injured. 

336.    At the time of the explosion, some of the children were playing in a parking lot near to No. 2
Centinjska Street, others were playing in Klara Cetkin Street and Witness AI was walking along Klara Cetkin Street in Alipašino Polje where he/she lived. 

337.    The three shells were fired from VRS positions somewhere to the west of A1ipašino Polje and no military activity was underway in the neighbourhood, nor were any soldiers to be seen, and the military facility called Kulin Ban (at a distance of at least 150 metres from the impact site)
was not the intended target of this attack. 
(iii) Findings

338.    Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 January 1994 at around noon, three mortar shells exploded in the residential neighbourhood of Alipašino Polje, killing six children, seriously injuring another three children and one adult. The evidence establishes that all the victims of the attack, except for one, were children. The Trial Chamber finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The shells also fell in a civilian area with no military activities in the vicinity.

339.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from VRS-held territory.
(b) Findings
(i) Indictment





4 February 1994: A salvo of three 120mm mortar shells hit civilians in the Dobrinja residential area. The first landed in front of an apartment building at Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street. The second and third landed among persons trading at a market in an open area to the rear of the apartment building at Mihajla Pupina Street and Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street. Eight people, including 1 child under the age of 15 years, were killed and at least 18 people, including 2 such children, were wounded. The origin of fire was from VRS-held territory, approximately to the
east. 




(ii) Incident

340.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the following facts. On 4 February l994, at around
11:00 hours., three mortar shells struck a residential neighbourhood in Dobrinja, in the south-west of the city adjacent to the Sarajevo Airport, exploding near the apartment buildings at Mihajla Pupina and Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Streets, next to the underground garage. At least eight people including a child were killed by shells and at least 18 people were wounded including two
children, Eldar Hafizović who was 17 years old at the time and Sabahudin Ljusa who was
11 years old. The Trial Chamber also took judicial notice of the fact that the eight victims killed by the shells were civilians. 
(iii) Investigation

341.    The investigation team was comprised of ballistic experts, Zlatko Međedović and Mirza Slabjica, and two forensic technicians, including Sead Bešić. Based on the spray of fragments on the site, the team concluded that the shells were fired from a 120mm mortar from the VRS-held positions at Lukavica. 

342.    Međedović testified that between the site of the incident and the lines held by the VRS there were only one or two buildings. The Trial Chamber further took judicial notice of the fact that Sabahudin Ljusa did not see any soldiers or military personnel, there were no ABiH military units close to the site on that day and that the Territorial Defence office based in a small room at no. 6 Oslobodilaca Sarajeva Street was not the target of the attack. 
(iv) Findings

343.    Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 4 February l994 at 11:00 hours, three mortar shells struck a residential neighbourhood in Dobrinja killing at least eight people including a child and injuring at least 18 people including two children.

344.    The Trial Chamber finds that the attack occurred in a civilian area with no military activities in the vicinity. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims of this attack were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber notes that many of the victims were engaged in casual civilian activities.

345.    The Defence challenges the evidence of MP-228 insofar as it relates to the source of fire. It points out that MP-228’s uncorroborated findings contain just conclusions and do not include any
specific evidence on the angle of descent, range of fire, the charge of the shell or other criteria
necessary to determine the origin of fire. The Defence submits that the mere establishing of the direction of fire is not conclusive of the origin of fire as any position along the axis of fire could be a potential source of fire for the shell. It further points out in this respect that the evidence of MP-
238, a member of the Bosnian unit charged with the ballistics investigations, suggests that the location of the ABiH forces in the line of fire was not considered as an essential factor in establishing the origin of fire with regard to another shelling incident. 

346.    The Defence also specifically challenges the credibility of MP-228. It argues that as an employee of the Bosnian Government, he had “no interest in concluding that anyone other than the SRK was responsible for firing the shells” since “it benefited the Bosnian Government to exploit
the situation to obtain favourable responses from the international community”. 

347.    Finally, according to the Defence, the fact that this incident was omitted in the indictment against Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karad`ić may lead to the “most reasonable” inference that the Prosecution investigators were unable to reach the conclusion that Bosnian Serbs were
responsible. 

348.    The Chamber notes that MP-228, in concluding that the shells originated in the SRK held territory, does not give any details on how, having established the direction of fire, his team reached the conclusion as to the origin of fire. The Chamber however finds the Defence’s credibility challenge to MP-228 to be speculative and that the fact that certain elements were not taken into
account in another investigation has limited weight in the present considerations. Consequently,
the Trial Chamber has no reason to doubt the conclusions reached by MP-228.

349.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells fired were the
120mm mortar shells fired from the VRS-held positions at Lukavica.
(c) 5 February 1994 (Incident A3)
(i) Indictment





5 February 1994: A 120mm mortar shell hit a crowded open air market called “Markale” situated in a civilian area of Old Town Sarajevo, killing at least 60 people and wounding over 140 people. The origin of fire was VRS-held territory approximately to the north/north east. 




(ii) Incident

350.    Markale market was an open air market where vendors sold their goods. It was located in the city centre, approximately 100 metres from the City Market on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street. 

351.    On 5 February 1994, between 12:00-12:30 hours, a projectile exploded in Markale market. 

352.    On that day, Muradif Čelik, who was retired at the time, was looking after one of the stalls on the market. When the shell exploded, he was wounded by shrapnel, mainly in his right leg and shoulder. He was taken to Koševo Hospital and then transferred to State Hospital where he stayed for two months and ten days. He underwent plastic surgery for his leg, but the medical staff was unable to remove the shrapnel from of his shoulder. 

353.    Ezrema Boškailo was shopping at the Markale market when the explosion of the projectile knocked her over. 

354.    Documentary evidence as well as the facts adjudicated in the Galić case show that, overall, the shell fired on 5 February 1994 killed over 60 persons and wounded over 140. 

355.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the 120mm mortar was deliberately fired from SRK-controlled territory, from the direction north-northeast of the market or at a bearing of approximately 18 degrees. Although the Defence has not explicitly challenged these adjudicated facts, it nevertheless led evidence that can be treated as rebuttal evidence in this
respect. The Trial Chamber notes that Ex. D666, a report of the UN Investigation Team established
to investigate this incident, stated that it could not establish the exact origin of fire and consequently which side of the conflict fired the shell. However, these findings were taken into account by the Trial Chamber in Galić while reaching its conclusion that the VRS fired the shell. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that Ex. D666 cannot be seen as rebutting the adjudicated facts from the Galić Trial Judgement that identify the origin of fire. Similarly, the Trial Chamber finds that Ex. D566, a report sent from the commander of the SRK to the VRS Main Staff on 5 February 1994,
denying responsibility for this incident, does not have sufficient weight to rebut the Galić
adjudicated facts.

356.    The Trial Chamber further took judicial notice of the fact that there was no military objective in the area of the Markale market and that the shell was deliberately aimed at civilians. 
(iii) Findings

357.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 5 February 1994, a 120mm mortar shell exploded in the Markale market killing at least 60 persons and wounding over 140 others. A cross-checking of the information contained in the list of people wounded that day in the Stari Grad area of Sarajevo with the information stemming from the lists of people admitted to local hospitals, including the exact time of admission and age of patients, allows for a finding that at least
45 people killed and 82 people wounded in the 5 February 1994 incident were civilians not taking part in hostilities. In reaching this finding, the Trial Chamber has also considered the location and the function played by the Markale market as a civilian public place.

358.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from
VRS-held territory and were deliberately aimed at civilians.
(d) 22 December 1994 (Incident A4)
(i) Indictment22 December 1994: Two 76mm shells in quick succession hit a flea market in the old commercial quarter of Baščaršija in Old Town. Two persons were killed and seven were injured. The origin of fire was Trebević, VRS positions. 
(ii) The Flea Market in the Old Town of Sarajevo

359.    The flea market is located behind the national library in the Bašćaršija neighbourhood of the Old Town Sarajevo, between the Petra Kočića and the Danila Ilića Streets. The area of the flea market is a densely populated civilian area. In December 1994, there were no military installations in the vicinity of the market, though Witness Ekrem Suljević testified that uniformed individuals could be found at the market. 
(iii) Incident

360.    On 22 December 1994, at around 9:10 hours, two shells exploded in rapid succession in the flea market. At that time, there were between 30 and 50 people in the area. Several eye- witnesses described the incident. Muradif Čelik, for instance, stated that he was at the flea market that morning and heard the explosion of the first shell before it threw him to the ground. When he got up, he ran to a nearby building. He also looked at the site of the explosion and saw smoke and heard screams of the wounded. Ramiz Hod`ić, wounded in the first explosion, stated that he
heard a second explosion less than one minute after the first. He then saw many people running
away and heard the sound of ambulance sirens. Shortly after, the police arrived and secured the area. 

361.    After receiving first aid, the wounded were transported to the hospital as soon as possible. The explosions resulted in the killing of Mirsad Delić and Hasan Hand`ić. The following seven people were also injured, three of them seriously: Envera Sadović, Samir Mujković, Rasim Krka, Ramiz Hod`ić, Salih Lukšija, Remzija Kihić and Imet Paćariz. One of the injured, Ramiz Hod`ić, provided a statement to the Prosecution that he was wounded mainly on his right thigh by a large piece of shrapnel caused by the first of the two explosions. Ramiz Hod`ić was treated at the hospital in the aftermath of the explosion. A large piece of shrapnel was removed from his thigh. Several small pieces of shrapnel however remained in his leg. In November 1995, Ramiz Hod`ić
was still suffering the consequences of these injuries. 
(iv) Investigation

362.    An on-site investigation was conducted by the Security Service Centre (“CSB”) in Sarajevo which compiled a report that included photographs of the scene and an analysis of the bomb fragments. The investigation team, including a ballistic expert, calculated the azimuth as 159 degrees and established that the two shells came from the south, that is, from the direction of Mount
Trebević, which was VRS-held territory at that time. It was also established that the first shell fell
“on a curb of the D. Ilića Street in front of stalls while the other fell just outside the entrance door of a consignment shop at P. Kočića Street 3”. 

363.    Based on the crater analysis and fragments found on the scene, the CSB investigative team concluded that two 76mm shells with UTI M68 fuses had been fired from a gun or cannon. A parallel investigation on the incident was also conducted by UNPROFOR. While UNPROFOR generally agreed with the findings made by the CSB, it concluded that the two projectiles were fired from an 82mm mortar. 
(v) Findings

364.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 December 1994 at about
9:10 hours, two shells exploded in rapid succession at the flea market in Baščaršija, killing two people and injuring seven. The Trial Chamber also finds that the shells were 76mm with UTI M68 fuses and not 82mm, as concluded by the UNPROFOR team. Ekrem Suljević testified that the fuses
UTI M68, fragments which were found on the site, were not used in 82mm mortar shells. Furthermore, the witness testified that mortar shells, unlike artillery shells, normally have a stabiliser or a fin attached to them to maintain the direction of the projectile. In that incident, however, no stabilisers related to 82mm mortar shells were found on the ground. 

365.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The Trial Chamber bases its finding on: (i) the evidence that the flea market was a very densely populated civilian area and there were no military installations or activities around; (ii) the
report of the civilian police stating that the victims were “civilians”; and (iii) the statements of eye-
witnesses and injured referring to the civilian status of the victims and the fact that the victims were engaged, on the day of the incident, in civilian activities and had civilian clothes. 

366.    As to the question whether the shells originated from VRS-held positions, the evidence shows that both VRS and ABiH forces were present in the area of Mount Trebević. In this regard, Suljević testified that the confrontation line between VRS and ABiH forces was located in the area
of Mount Trebević. Suljević was also unable to determine the origin of fire –which is essential in
this specific case - but only “believed” that this came from “the region that was controlled by the Army of Republika Srpska”. No evidence was adduced in relation to the charge of the shells, which would have provided an indication as to the distance travelled by the shells. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the shells were launched from the direction of Mount Trebević, but cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that the two shells which hit the flea market
originated from VRS-held positions.
(e) 24 May 1995 (Incident A5)
(i) Indictment





24 May 1995: A missile projectile landed and exploded on the asphalt of Safeta Zajke Street, killing two and injuring five people. The projectile came from the south east, direction Lukavica. 




(ii) Incident

367.    Safeta Zajke Street is located in the Novi Grad municipality of Sarajevo, near the railway technical school and across the railway tracks behind the television building. In May 1995, Anña Gotovac lived at 43 Safeta Zajke Street, 100-150 metres away from the television building. A
power transformer station, the Novi Grad municipal building and a wire factory were also
nearby. This area was not normally targeted by sniper fire, although it was constantly shelled. ABiH units were positioned on Mount Žuč approximately two kilometres from Safeta Zajke Street. Anđa Gotovac testified that she never saw any military activities in her street or neighbourhood. 

368.    On 24 May 1995, at about 10:00 hours, Anña Gotovac was outside her house sitting at a table in front of her garage. She heard a noise, first quite soft and then louder, that sounded like a low-flying plane. Before she had a chance to look, there was an explosion. She grabbed the table, but the force of the explosion pulled it out of her hands, knocked her over, and utterly destroyed the roof of her house. Gotovac then heard screams after the explosion. 

369.    Anña Gotovac was wounded by a piece of shrapnel which penetrated her left shoulder and lodged near her eighth rib. Taken to the State Hospital by a neighbour, she underwent surgery to remove the shrapnel. After the surgery, she was discharged but needed daily after-care for two months. Gotovac also testified that another individual lost his legs, and a neighbour was wounded in the same incident. 

370.    Anña Gotovac does not know where the projectile came from, however, she was told that the projectile came from Hresa, or possibly Trebević. She believes that the television building
was hit by another projectile that same day. 

371.    The explosion in Safeta Zajke Street killed Aiša Hrustan and Ivo Miletić and wounded
Franjo Tolić, D`emal Kukuljac, Igor Vučičević, Anđa Gotovac and Dra`en Gelo. Witness MP-
228, a member of the CSB, testified that all the victims were civilians. He inferred the status of victims, inter alia, from their age and clothing. 
(iii) Investigation

372.    In the early afternoon of 24 May 1995, the CSB and members of the Department for Forensic and Anti-Terrorism (“KSZ”) conducted an investigation on the incident. Upon his arrival at the scene, a member of the CSB took photographs, marked pieces of evidence with numbers and prepared a sketch of the site. Fragments and other material collected were transmitted to the Crime Prevention and Detection Unit of the MUP for expert analysis. 

373.    According to the report prepared by the CSB, the team concluded that the projectile was fired from the south-east, the Lukavica area held by the VRS. Such conclusion was based on the fact that fragments of the projectile were embedded in the asphalt at a certain angle and the projectile had made a funnel-shaped crater in a south-easterly direction. 

374.    The CSB report also concluded that the extensive damage caused by the explosion could not have been caused by a mortar shell, tank shell or by a shell fired from a gun. The expert report of the Crime Prevention and Detection Unit of the MUP reached the conclusion that the bomb used
was most likely a Fugasno Avio Bombes 250 (“FAB 250”), propelled by four 122mm rocket
motors attached to the air-bomb by a metal sheath. This was supported by the fact that the items that were collected at the scene included large pipes and pieces of tin, which are usually found where a modified air bomb explodes. 

375.    MP-238, a member of the KSZ, testified that the Bosnian government forces did not possess modified air bombs. Furthermore, the witness testified that the ABiH did not have the rocket engines which were necessary to launch modified air bombs. 
(iv) Findings

376.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 24 May 1995, at about 10:00 hours, a modified air bomb, model FAB 250, landed and exploded in Safeta Zajke Street, Novi Grad municipality, killing two and injuring five. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians and not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The Trial Chamber also notes the testimony of MP-228, according to which the victims were civilians and the shell fell in a residential area with only family houses, killing and injuring people inside.

377.    The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells originated from
VRS-held territory.
(f) 24 May 1995 (Incident A6)
(i) Indictment





24 May 1995: A modified air-bomb landed at Majdanska Street. Two civilians were killed and at least six were wounded. The origin of fire was determined as coming from the south-east, the VRS territory of Pavlovac. 




(ii) Incident

378.    On 24 May 1995, Enes Jašarević, an electrician, was working at the Otoka transformer
station, located behind the municipality building of Novi Grad in Sarajevo and 100-150 metres
away from the TV building, which is across Majdanska Street. A primary school and the Opacno residential buildings were located nearby. There were no military positions anywhere near the transformer station, nor had Jašarević noticed any military personnel or military activity in the vicinity on that day. 

379.    At around 10:00 hours, an air bomb fell. Jašarević heard an unusual sound of something flying over from the direction of Lukavica and a subsequent explosion “somewhere behind the TV building”. After 14:00 hours, a second air bomb exploded when Jašarević had just left the
transformer building with his foreman, Sulejman Praško, and a colleague, Salko Slato. The
foreman had remained behind while the two other men were some 10 metres from the gate. The bomb exploded behind them, inside the transformer fence, hitting the bottom of a pylon, which collapsed. The explosion threw the men to the middle of the street. Jašarević saw the air bomb flying from the direction of Mojmilo Hill, although he could not say exactly from where it originated. 

380.    As a result of the explosion, Sulejman Praško, who had remained behind, died instantly, although Jašarević could not see any apparent injuries from a quick look at him. Salko Slato was
hit in the back and Jašarević was injured in his legs and right arm. Jašarević was eventually brought to the State Hospital in Marin Dvor. 

381.    A report prepared by the CSB indicated that, in addition to Sulejman Praško, another person, Nezir Huseinović, was killed. Six people were injured, namely, Salko Slato, Enes Jašarević, Fatima Konaković, Goran Jeličić, Lucija Jurišić and Mira Lovrić. 
(iii) Investigations

382.    According to a CSB report on the incident, the second bomb made a crater which was about five metres long, 1.5 metres wide and 1.5 metres deep. Based on the analysis of the crater, which was facing south, it was concluded that the second bomb had been fired from the same place as the bomb which fell in Safeta Zajke Street, that is, Lukavica. Witness MP-228, a crime technician who participated in the investigation, stated that the projectile came from the south-east, a hill
named Pavlovac. 

383.    The CSB report also concluded that the projectile consisted of a modified aerial bomb with multiple rocket-launchers (“VBR rockets”), similar to the one which exploded in Safeta Zajke Street. Witness MP-228 testified that he assumed that it was a modified air-bomb in light of the devastation caused by the explosion, which included a large hole in the ground and vast damage to surrounding buildings. The forensic section of the MUP which conducted an expert analysis on the traces of the explosion confirmed that the pieces found on the site of the explosion “probably” belong to a FAB-250 aircraft bomb propelled by five 122mm GRAD type rockets. 
(iv) Findings

384.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 24 May 1995 at about 14:00
hours, a modified air bomb, FAB-250, exploded at Majdanska Street, killing two individuals and
injuring six others. The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the incident occurred. The bomb fell inside the area of the transformer building, which is a civilian object, with no military personnel or military activity inside or in the proximity of that building. Furthermore, the victims were employees at the transformer building and/or engaged in civilian
activities. 

385.    The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shell was launched from south or south-east, where the VRS held their positions. 
(g) 18 June 1995 (Incident A7)
(i) Indictment





18 June 1995: A 120mm mortar shell struck civilians at a water distribution centre in Marka Oreškovića Street, Dobrinja. Seven persons were killed and twelve injured. The origin of the fire was Ned`arići, VRS territory. 




(ii) The Water Distribution Pump at the Simon Bolivar Elementary School in Dobrinja

386.    The Simon Bolivar Elementary School is located on Marka Oreškovića Street in Dobrinja. Sometime in May 1992, it was shelled and burned down. Thereafter a water-pump was installed in a hall within the ruins of the school building, which provided some shelter for
people to queue in safety for water distribution. The water-pump was actually in open air. According to Azra Šišić, the Simon Bolivar Elementary School water-pump was the safest in
Dobrinja. 

387.    According to Azra Šišić, Muharem, a man who lived in the neighbourhood, was put in charge of the water-pump by the civil protection unit. 
(iii) Incident

388.    A few days before 18 June 1995, the people from the neighbourhood heard that water would be distributed, so they reserved their place in the line by placing their jerry-cans in line at the school. On 17 June 1995, there was too much shelling on Dobrinja to open the water
distribution. The following morning, however, was quiet and Šišić heard that water would be
distributed that day, so she decided to go to the school. 

389.    On 18 June 1995, a clear day, the police were present at the school in the morning, advising people to avoid gathering all around the water pump, but rather to go there one at a time. There were about 50 to 70 people present at the water-line in the Simon Bolivar School. Amongst them were mostly women and children, but also some men. At about 11:40 hours, a mortar shell
hit the Simon Bolivar School and exploded above people’s heads. 

390.    People were thrown on the ground by the explosion and were screaming. Šišić was wounded on her right thigh and heel, but she managed to reach her apartment building. From there, she was brought to the near-by Dobrinja Hospital, where she was treated. 

391.    Other wounded persons were taken to the Dobrinja Hospital. At least one person, Rešad Imamović, died in the blast and others died at the hospital, including Azra Šišić’s 19 year old neighbour, Kenan Čizmić. 

392.    The following persons died as a result of the explosion: Bahrija Sijerčić, Kenan Čizmić, Izet
Kadić, Rešad Imamović, Sulejman Mehmedović, Safet Lončar and Nura Lončar. 

393.    The persons who were injured as a result of the explosion were: Emira Nović, Edin Smajić, Mutimir Miušković, Afan Kalabić, Azra Šišić, Omer Mušanović, Hasnija Begić, Suada Sinanović, Muharem Mistrić, Bosa Šućur, Muniba Alić and Vladimir Milojević. 

394.    According to one of the witnesses, all the victims were civilians. There were neither military facilities near the school, nor combat positions or activities at the time the incident occurred. However, the command post of the Dobrinska Brigade of the ABiH was located at
about 150 metres from the Dobrinja Hospital, on the same street as the hospital. 
(iv) Investigation

395.    On 18 June 1995, at 14:00 hours, a team consisting of seven Bosnian officials conducted the on-site investigation at the Simon Bolivar School. It included members of the local police, the CSB, Anti-Bomb-Squad (“KDZ”) and forensic officials, and a judge of the High Court of Sarajevo. According to the official report of the CSB, the site was secured by the local police. The team
found that the shell had exploded on the west wall of the Simon Bolivar School at about four meters from the ground. Traces of shrapnel could be seen on the surrounding walls, and pools of blood, tissue, brain parts, fragments of human skulls were found around the water-pump. 

396.    The team collected material from the scene, including the tail fin and several pieces of shell shrapnel. The tail fin of the projectile was found on the other side of the wall from where the shell impacted. It belonged to a 120mm mortar shell and bore the markings “MK, M74
KV9307” in Cyrillic, indicating that this shell had been manufactured in July 1993 in the Krušik factory, a military production complex in Valjevo, Serbia. 

397.    Because the shell hit the wall rather than a flat surface, it was impossible to determine the angle of descent of the projectile. However, based on the impact point on the west wall and
on the explosion traces on the walls, the team established that the shell had been fired from a north-westerly direction at 320 degrees. MP-238 stated that the range of a 120mm mortar shell was about “a couple of kilometres”. On the axis of the azimuth, at a distance of about 1500 meters, was the Serbian held area of Ned`arići, which the team identified as the origin of the fire. 

398.    A team of UNMOs arrived at the Simon Bolivar School about one and half hours after the impact, when the Bosnian police had already left the site. As the tail fin had been removed and the victims taken to the Dobrinja Hospital, they could not conduct a “proper investigation” or confirm the findings of the Bosnian police as to the origin of fire. Captain Hansen, one of the
UNMOs, however, stated that judging by the impact marks on the wall the shell was fired from the north-west. The UNMOs were also taken to the Dobrinja Hospital, where a Bosnian official showed them the tail fin of the shell. Captain Hansen confirmed it was “definitely” the tail fin of a
120mm shell. Although he had no way of verifying whether it was the same tail fin removed from the scene, he could see “no reason to lie about this”. 

399.    During cross-examination, MP-238 was confronted with Captain Hansen’s statement that given the location of the confrontation line, the mortar shell could have been fired by either the ABiH or SRK. The witness excluded the possibility that the shell could have been fired from
ABiH positions, as these were too close to the school. 

400.    On the evening of 18 June 1995, a news report on the BiH television reported that the shell had been fired from the Lukavica Barracks, which was to the east of the impact area and also held
by the VRS at the time. Having heard such news, on the following day, two of the Bosnian investigators returned to the incident site to re-examine the scene. They confirmed the finding made the previous day and unequivocally excluded the possibility that the shell could have been fired from the Lukavica barracks, as the shell would have had to turn around in the air to cause impact on the west side of the wall. 

401.    A UNMO situation report dated 19 June 1995 stated that on 18 June 1995, at 11:46 hours, the UNMO team OP4 stationed on the hillside at Vitkovac, observed one explosion in Dobrinja with the origin of fire in the Bosnian Serb held area. The situation report did not identify the exact location where the fire originated. Yet, it included the information that the UNMO team could observe that the round was fired from the Bosnian Serb held area. 

402.    The expert report of Richard Higgs, which is based on the official report of the Bosnian authorities, as well as on two witness statements, confirmed that the round came from a westerly direction. Based on the pictures and sketches of the scene, Higgs noted that the buildings around the school eliminate certain options and that “the enclosed nature of the incident scene and the
position of the strike on the wall only leaves sic one direction that the round could have been fired from”. The expert found the investigation methodology used by the Bosnian authorities to be correct, but stressed that the bearing of 320 should be considered an approximation and that given the absence of the angle of descent, the issue of the range is much more difficult to calculate. According to the expert, Ned`arići was therefore the “most likely firing position”, the fire would have been more accurate from there and the school can be seen from that position. The expert,
however, did not exclude that the fire could have come from further away. 
(v) Findings

403.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 18 June 1995 at about 11:40 hours, a 120mm mortar shell exploded at the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja, killing 7 and injuring 12 individuals.

404.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the only reasonable inference that can be drawn from the evidence is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time. The mortar shell hit the Simon Bolivar School, a civilian building used solely as a water distribution point for the inhabitants of Dobrinja and the victims were all neighbours engaged in a civilian activity, i.e. standing in line for their turn to fetch water. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber notes the testimony of MP-238 and the findings of the CSB report, according to which the victims were civilians.

405.    Regarding the origin of the fire, the Defence submits that it cannot be reached beyond a reasonable doubt that the VRS fired the shell. The Defence also argues that the provenance of the manufacture of the shell from Valjevo, Serbia, cannot support the CSB investigators’ conclusion, as the ABiH recovered and fired VRS 120mm mortar shells. 1078 In addition, the Defence argues that it is equally plausible that the ABiH fired the shell “in the midst of the campaign to break-out of Sarajevo”, but that the CSB investigating team had no interest in concluding that anyone other than the SRK was responsible for firing the shells”, rather they reached an “unproved assumption that the SRK was responsible”. 

406.    The Trial Chamber finds that these arguments – individually or collectively – do not raise any reasonable doubt as to the origin of the fire.

407.    MP-238 testified that it was impossible for the mortar to have been fired by ABiH as its position was too close to the impact site. This is supported by the expert opinion of Higgs that Ned`arići was the most likely firing position, but that the shell “could have still come from further away” 

408.    The Defence asserts that MP-238 did not take into account the proximity of the confrontation line during the investigation “as it was not an essential factor”. The Trial Chamber notes that the witness testified that he used a map which shows exactly the confrontation line, so he
was aware of its distance to the impact site. The Trial Chamber is satisfied therefore that MP-238 took into consideration the confrontation line in making his determination as to the origin of fire. 

409.    By the same token, the Trial Chamber is also not persuaded that the CSB failed to perform a professionally objective investigation. To the contrary, the evidence shows that the methodology used by the Bosnian investigators was correct. 

410.    Finally, The Trial Chamber is mindful of having taken judicial notice of the Dragomir Milošević Trial Judgement finding that “ o n the basis of the evidence in its totality as admitted in the Milošević case the Milošević Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the mortar was launched from SRK-held territory”. However, this Trial Chamber notes that the evidence led in this case partially
differs from that led in the Milošević case. In particular, the differing evidence before this Trial
Chamber includes the testimony of Per Anton Brennskag of the OP4 in relation to the UNMO Situation Report of 19 June 1995 identifying the origin of the fire in the SRK-held territory and the additional investigative evidence of Mirsad Kučanin. 

411.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the shell which exploded at the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja was fired from the SRK-held area of Ned`arići.

412.    The Defence also avers – as an alternative argument – that the Prosecution failed to prove that the intent was to target civilians. The Defence argues that the shell was fired amid an ongoing battle with a major ABiH offensive unfolding for the “break-out” of Sarajevo. The Defence also refers to the vicinity of the confrontation lines and an ABiH command post. 

413.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the VRS deliberately fired the shell on the Simon Bolivar School in Dobrinja and rejects the Defence argument based on the following considerations.

414.    The evidence shows that the ABiH launched an attack in Sarajevo on 16 June 1995 and that on 18 June 1995 ingoing and outgoing firing was recorded around Sarajevo before and after the
time of the incident. The evidence also generally shows that Sarajevo was constantly shelled
through the conflict. On that day, however, the situation in Dobrinja was quiet and that’s why – according to witnesses’ testimony – the water was distributed. The UNMO’s Situation Report also recorded the impact of one shell in Dobrinja on 18 June 1995 as the only firing activity of that day. In addition, as noted by the expert witness, the school was visible from the SRK position. 

415.    Finally, the Trial Chamber has received evidence that mortars are very accurate weapons, with an accuracy margin of less than 40 metres. Evidence also shows that the confrontation lines and the ABiH command post were at about 200 and 150 metres respectively from the school. Since there was no ongoing combat in that area at the time of the incident, the Trial Chamber is not satisfied that the Defence argument raises a reasonable doubt as to the intent of the attack.
(h) 1 July 1995 (Incident A8)
(i) Indictment





1 July 1995: At about 2130 hours, a rocket projectile with a concussion warhead exploded in
Bunićki Potok street. Thirteen people were injured. The projectile came from Ilid`a. 




(ii) Hrasnica

416.    Hrasnica is a neighbourhood on the outskirts of Sarajevo, located at the foot of Mt. Igman, south-west of the airport. In July 1995, Hrasnica and Mt. Igman were held by the ABiH, whereas the areas to the north-west and to the south-east of Hrasnica were held by the VRS. The
so-called “Igman Road” or “Blue Road” ran across Mt. Igman, descending down to Hrasnica and
continuing to Sarajevo. It connected the city to the rest of the ABiH held territory beyond Mt. Igman and was used to transport supplies to Hrasnica and Sarajevo. 
(iii) Incident

417.    On the evening of 1 July 1995 at about 21:30 hours, Zejna Šljivo, a 65-year old housewife, was in the kitchen of her house on Bunićki Potok Street 233 in Hrasnica, together with her daughters Nefa and Jasmina, her son-in-law Ned`ad and her four-year old granddaughter
Emira. Suddenly, they heard a loud hissing sound, which Nefa Šljivo recognised as that of a
missile being launched. As they all ran to the kitchen door there was a loud explosion which shattered the windows and collapsed parts of the house. Zejna Šljivo, Jasmina and Emira were injured on their heads, Ned`ad broke his wrist or fingers, and Nefa suffered some light injuries on her back. They all managed to get out of the debris of the house and reach the Hrasnica hospital, where their wounds were treated. Upon returning to the house, they found a large crater in front of the house, where the garage used to stand. The house was no longer habitable due to the damage. The neighbouring houses also sustained heavy damage and about 50 houses in the
surrounding area showed signs of the explosion. 

418.    At the time of the explosion, Fikreta Pačariz, a 37-year old saleswoman, was on the ground floor of her house on Bunićki Potok Street 26 with her husband, Hamo Pačariz, and their two children. They also heard a loud approaching sound of “something flying through the air”. After a few seconds of silence, there was a “horrifying” explosion and they were hit by careering
pieces of glass, ceiling and furniture. Fikreta Pačariz was wounded on her face and head by hurtling pieces of glass, while her husband was thrown against the wall. Hamo’s father, Duran Pačariz, who was on the upper floor of the house with his wife, was injured to the head, leg, arm and buttocks. His wife was in shock, but unharmed. Hamo brought Duran and Fikreta to Hrasnica hospital, where they were treated. When they returned home, they assessed that the house was uninhabitable and also noted that many of the surrounding houses had also been extensively damaged. Many of the neighbours were injured in the explosion and two weeks later, Duran Pačariz succumbed to his injuries. 

419.    Adjacent to Zejna Šljivo’s house, five members of an UNMO team were accommodated on the first floor of a residential building. The team members were: Captain Frank Melum from Norway, Major Ijaz Hussain Malik from Pakistan, Squadron Leader Kamal Mortuza from
Bangladesh, Captain Francisco Silva from Brazil and Captain Mark Hache from Canada. 

420.    Malik described that he heard a whistling sound of something “big” approaching. After a few seconds of silence, there was a loud explosion outside the house. The blast shattered the windows and caused some of the doors to fly off their hinges. Malik was hit by a window thrown off its frame, injuring his right arm, eye and forehead. As he fell, he also wounded his left leg. 

421.    Kamal Mortuza was also injured in the incident. He and Malik both received first aid from the other UNMOs and were then taken to Hrasnica hospital. The following morning they were both transferred to the French hospital in Sarajevo and from there they were eventually discharged. 

422.    Documentary evidence shows that between 21:40 hours and 21:50 hours on that evening, the Hrasnica hospital admitted and subsequently treated the following 13 persons for wounds suffered in the explosion on Bunićki Potok Street: Enes Kadić, Ned`ad Bostand`ić, Emira Kadić, Jasmina Bostand`ić, Emira Bostand`ić, Nefa Šljivo, Zejna Šljivo, Duran Pačariz, Fikreta Pačariz,
Hata Mulaosmanović, Naza Pamuk, Kemal Mortuza and “Husein Ijaz”. 
(iv) Investigation

423.    Later on the same evening, the Hrasnica local police arrived at the scene and secured the impact site in front of Zejna Šljivo’s house. The local police also found damage to the house and property of Alija Kustur, on Alekse Šantića Street no. 50, at about 150 metres from where the
explosion occurred. 

424.    The following morning, on 2 July 1995, at about 8:00 hours, an investigating team composed of one investigative judge, three CSB forensic inspectors and two members of the KDZ, arrived at the scene on Bunički Potok Street. The investigators, including Vekaz Turković,
examined the crater, measured all the traces and took photographs of the site. 

425.    The investigating team established that the crater was located in front of Zejna Šljivo’s house at Bunićki Potok Street no. 233, where the garage used to be, at a distance of 4.90 metres from the front of the house. The investigators noted that the house, which was built of “solid
materials”, was completely destroyed and that the surrounding houses were heavily damaged,
including those of Fikreta Pačariz and Enes Kadić. In the latter, the UNMOs were accommodated. According to the report on the investigations, it was concluded that the explosion was caused by a “concussion warhead rocket projectile” fired from the north, from the surrounding VRS-held area of Ilid`a. 

426.    The investigating team then moved to the impact site on Alekse Šantića Street no. 50, which is about 150 metres from the impact site at Bunićki Potok Street. There, they found another crater and rocket motor parts. According to the report, on 1 July 1995 at 21:30 hours, a projectile fired from the VRS positions in Ilid`a had hit the northern top part of the house underneath the roof before it landed in the garden, on the south eastern side of the house. 

427.    Vekaz Turković, one of the investigators, testified that initially the team believed that there had been two modified air bombs, one that had exploded in Bunićki Potok Street and the other that had landed at Alekse Šantića Street without exploding. However, the investigators did not find a second warhead when investigating the site at Alekse Šantića Street. As a consequence, they
concluded that the damage at both locations had been caused by one modified air bomb, which
ricocheted twice, first on the upper corner of the house and then in the garden, before finally landing and exploding on the garage of Zejna Šljivo’s house on Bunićki Potok Street. According to the report, the concussion warhead projectile got “unfastened from the rest of the projectile”. 

428.    According to Turković, the investigating team was able to determine the direction of fire (i.e. the Ilid`a area) from an analysis of the distance between the two points of ricochet. According to the witness, “it was a simple finding using basic human knowledge without any expertise”. 

429.    While the local police conducted their investigation, UNMOs Captain Melum and Major Bruurmijn also conducted their own investigation. In line with previous training they had received, they examined the crater and its environs and used a compass to establish the origin of the projectile. 

430.    At the impact site, Melum and Bruurmijn found the projectile only, whereas the local police had already seized the propulsion system composed of six rockets of two different calibres (128mm and 122mm), found approximately 150 metres away. Major Bruurmjin saw the rockets later at the local police station. 

431.    Based on the analysis of the crater, the warhead and the propulsion system, the UNMO investigating team concluded that the explosion of 1 July 1995 at Bunićki Potok Street had been caused by a 231-kilogram air bomb consisting of a concussion projectile with a delayed fuse attached to two sets of three rockets each. The bomb had been launched from a rail from a direction
between 280 and 320 degrees. The UNMOs also established that the location where the
propulsion system was found was within the same direction range of 280 and 320 degrees. Based on these factors, Major Bruurmijn identified the Ilidža area, which was then held by the
VRS, as the source of fire. 

432.    While the UNMO team was not allowed by the local police to investigate the impact site at Alekse Šantića Street, Major Bruurmijn had the opportunity to discuss their findings with the local investigators. Initially, the local police were persuaded that a distinct unexploded modified air bomb had caused the damage there. Major Bruurmijn indicated to them that an UNMO observation
post had observed only one projectile. He also stressed the local police’s own finding that no warhead had been found at the Alekse Šantića Street site and no rockets had been found at the Bunićki Potok Street site. As a consequence, the conclusion he shared with the local police was that the parts retrieved at the two sites belonged to the same air bomb which had most likely fallen apart in flight. Major Bruurmijn considers the theory of a double ricochet adduced by the local police to be less probable than the theory that the air bomb fell apart in flight. However, in light of the fact that he could not investigate the impact site at Alekse Šantića Street, he could not exclude the
ricochet theory. 
(v) Possible Military Targets

433.    Nefa Šljivo testified that he could not recall there being any military activity on
1 July 1995 and that there were no ABiH military installations or targets near his house. He clarified that there were some ABiH soldiers in the area of Hrasnica, but not where the modified air bomb landed. Similarly, he testified that during his stay in Hrasnica, approximately every two days, the witness saw groups of three to four ABiH soldiers. On the top of Mt. Igman, he suspected there to be an ABiH base. Soldiers from this base, upon the end of their shifts, descended to Hrasnica to their families. Major Bruurmijn also stated that, as far as he was aware, there were no military targets in the area where the explosion occurred. According to him, the only place
of any military significance would have been the Famos factory, where he had heard that the
Bosnian Muslims produced ammunitions or weapons. The Trial Chamber notes that the Famos
factory is located about one kilometre from Hrasnica. 

434.    Thorbjørn Øvergård, another UNMO based in Hrasnica until 1 May 1995, testified that the ABiH 4th Motorised Brigade had its headquarters in the centre of Hrasnica. He, however, also stated that the centre of Hrasnica was a “residential civilian area”. Furthermore, when faced with the information that the 4th Motorised Brigade consisted of 3,000 to 3,500 military men, Thorbjørn Øvergård answered that he had never seen so many soldiers in Hrasnica. 
(vi) Findings

435.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 1 July 1995 at about 21:30 hours, a modified air bomb exploded at Bunićki Potok Street, injuring 13 persons. The Trial Chamber finds that the bomb fell in a civilian area of Hrasnica with no military activities nearby. The only reasonable inference is that all the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time. The Trial Chamber bases its conclusion on the fact that (i) the air bomb landed in a residential area and (ii) the victims included a housewife, a student, a business woman, three children, pensioners and UNMOs.

436.    The Trial Chamber notes that the evidence shows two alternative explanations of the manner of the shell explosion: one based on the double ricochet theory; the other that the bomb disassembled in flight, losing its propulsion system on Alekse Šantića Street at about 150 metres from where it finally landed and exploded. The Trial Chamber is unable to reach a conclusion beyond a reasonable doubt on this issue as both explanations, based on the evidence, appear plausible. Regardless of which of the two explanations is correct, the Trial Chamber is however satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the modified air bomb originated from the VRS held
territory of Ilid`a. 
(i) 28 August 1995 (Incident A9)
(i) Indictment





28 August 1995: A 120mm mortar shell landed in Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street outside the entrance to the City Market. At least 35 persons were killed and 78 were injured. The origin of the fire was Trebević, VRS territory. 




(ii) The City Market

437.    The indoor city market of Sarajevo (“City Market”) is located in a building in the city centre, on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije Street. The City Market is approximately100 metres from the Markale open market. At the time, the Sarajevo police had warned people not to gather in public places due to the risk of shelling and sniping attacks. In spite of this warning, Markale was one of the places where people would gather in large groups. 
(iii) Incident

438.    On the morning of 28 August 1995, Đula Leka, a 65 years old pensioner, was shopping for groceries in the city centre with her husband Ahmed. At about 11:00 hours, they were in the vicinity of the City Market and as they approached the corner of the market building, a shell landed and exploded in front of the entrance to the City Market. Đula Leka was standing at about five to seven metres from the impact point and the blast knocked her down to the pavement. She was wounded on the left arm and breast. Around her, she saw injured persons lying on the street moaning in pain or crying for help. Đula Leka also saw a lot of dead persons covered in blood on the street, including her brother-in-law at about 10 metres from her. At that moment, she
did not know where her husband was. A taxi drove her to Koševo Hospital where she was
treated for her wounds. She was then transferred to the Thorax Surgery Clinic of the Clinical Centre of Sarajevo University, where she remained for another four to five days. While at the Koševo hospital, Đula Leka noted that the hospital was “very busy because of the large number of wounded people”. 

439.    According to Đula Leka, the city centre where the shell landed was a strictly civilian area, with no military activity. 
(iv) Investigation
a. Introduction

440.    The incident at the City Market became commonly known as Markale II, to distinguish it from an earlier incident of a similar scale which occurred on 5 February 1994 at the nearby open market. The mortar impact on the City Market was observed from the UNMO observation post 1
(“OP-1”), situated at Čolina Kapa, south of Sarajevo on the hills overlooking the city. Within
one hour after the explosion, three separate investigations were initiated by French UNPROFOR
engineers, UNMO team and Bosnian police. 

441.    Later the same day, a follow-up investigation and analysis of all the evidence, including the findings of the UNPROFOR and UNMO teams, as well as the OP-1 observation, was also carried
out by a senior UNPROFOR intelligence officer (“UNPROFOR G-2”) on instructions of Lt.
General Rupert Smith, the UNPROFOR Commander for BiH. The conclusions of the UNPROFOR G-2 were included in one final report. 
b. UNMO Observation Post 1

442.    The OP-1 comprised an observation post proper and a house about 150 metres downhill, where the UNMOs would sleep, when at the post, but not on duty. Both locations had a strategic view over all the city of Sarajevo. OP-1 was run by members of the UNMO team Sarajevo Central 1 (“SC-1”), which had its team base in Sedrenik and at the time was under the command of Lt. Col. Harry Konings. 

443.    At about 9:00 hours on 28 August 1995, UNMOs Thom Knustad from Norway and Paul Conway from Ireland assumed their duties at OP-1. It was a bright, sunny morning and Knustad was sitting outside the house while Conway was at the observation post. At about 11:00 hours, Knustad saw a smokestack coming up from what he instantly identified as the
Markale area and then heard the impact about five to six seconds later. Knustad joined Conway
at the observation post, where they recorded the incident in the log book kept there and Conway
immediately reported the incident to the UNMO headquarters at the PTT building. 
c. UNMO and UNPROPER Investigations

444.    Lt. Col. Konings,as UNMO’s team leader was informed of the explosion via UNMO radio as he was driving to SC-1, on his way back from the UNMO Headquarters. A few minutes after he reached the team base in Sedrenik, the local police called him requesting assistance for the investigation. Konings and two colleagues, Captain Carbonel from Spain and Lt. Higgs from the United Kingdom, picked up the CSB officers from the police station and arrived at the scene of the incident about 30 to 40 minutes after the explosion. 

445.    Upon arrival at the City Market, they observed layers of broken glass, many blood pools and body parts on the street. The dead bodies, however, had already been removed from the scene. A team of UNPROFOR French officers was already active on the scene and some members of the Sarajevo police were also present. The UNMOs, the French UNPROFOR and the CSB police carried out parallel, but separate investigations. 

446.    The UNMO team and the French UNPROFOR engineers processed the scene by performing the crater analysis and calculating the azimuth bearing independently of each other. The crater was located in front of the entrance of the City Market building, whereas the tail fin of the shell was found a little further away from the crater and was identified as that of a 120mm mortar
projectile. 

447.    According to Konings, the imprint of the crater in the asphalt was very clear and it was immediately recognised as one from a mortar projectile – which can be distinguished from any other artillery projectile – caused by a 120mm mortar shell. Based on the shrapnel dispersion pattern of the crater, the UNMOs concluded that the mortar projectile had been fired from a southern direction at an azimuth bearing of approximately 170 degrees. The French UNPROFOR also reached the conclusion that the mortar shell had been fired from a southerly
direction, specifically from a bearing of 2850 milliéms, which corresponds to about 160 degrees. The French UNPROFOR then measured the distance between the crater and the wall of the City Market building. This data was used to calculate the minimum angle at which the mortar shell impacted on the asphalt, which resulted in 67 degrees. 

448.    The azimuth bearing and the estimated angle of impact, however, were insufficient to determine with precision the firing position, as the distance a mortar projectile can travel varies depending on the propulsion charge used. As the latter was unknown, neither the UNMO team
nor the UNPROFOR team could establish the exact origin of fire. The UNPROFOR team,
however, estimated that the mortar shell could have been fired with small charge from a distance of
500 to 600 metres, or with a stronger charge from a greater distance up to 5,000 metres. The latter
option placed the origin of fire on Mt. Trebević, behind the confrontation lines, which were at about 1,050 metres from the impact point. 

449.    After filing his report, Konings spoke with OP-1 observers Thomas Knustad and Paul Conway. The morning of the incident was sunny, there was no wind and the observers had good visibility on almost the entire city. The two observers did not hear any mortar being fired until they saw the smokestack from the market area and subsequently heard the impact. Konings testified that an outgoing 120mm round makes a “loud bang”, creates a flash and smoke, which in
his professional opinion could not be missed on a clear and quiet day such as 28 August 1995. According to him, this specific mortar round must then have been fired from farther away behind the mountain ridge, which muffled the sound. Knustad, who also had expertise in artillery, confirmed this reasoning and stated that he would not have heard the round being fired from behind
the VRS line “due to the configuration of the terrain and the way the sound would move behind the hill, behind his position”. Based on those observations in conjunction with his own findings during the investigations, Konings concluded that the firing position was located in the VRS-held
territory. 

450.    In addition, at the time of the incident, the mortar-locating Cymbaline radar used by UNPROFOR G-2 was operating in the area. The radar was set on a direction arc and elevation that would have detected the trajectory of any mortar fired within a range of 950 metres or less. The analysis of the data collected from the radar showed that a mortar shell fired from a distance of
900 metres from the impact zone would have reached a height on its trajectory which would have been registered by the radar beam. For the mortar shell which hit the City Market to pass undetected by the radar, its trajectory must have been lower than the radar beam, which meant that the shell had been fired from a position at a range between 1,550 and 3,500 metres, depending on the
propulsion charge. 

451.    Based on the findings of the UNMO and UNPROFOR investigations, the observation of Knustad and Conway, as well as the data collected by radar, the UNPROFOR G-2 report submitted to Smith concluded that the firing position of the mortar shell was located in the VRS held territory, probably Lukavica, at a distance of between 3,000 to 5,000 metres. 
d. Local Police Investigations

452.    The local police investigation team consisted of the investigative judge of the High Court in Sarajevo, a prosecutor from the High Public Prosecutor’s Office in Sarajevo, KDZ officers and CSB police and forensic officers. Upon their arrival at the scene, the team noted that most of the
bodies had been removed and all the injured persons had been taken to hospital. The CSB police officers observed the crater caused by the mortar which was on one lane of the road, close to the pavement. The scene was secured by them and access was allowed only to the local and international investigative teams. 

453.    Although the scene had been slightly altered by the removal of killed and injured persons, the crater itself had not been altered. As one of the witnesses explained, the crater was in the asphalt and could have been modified only with the use of heavy machinery over a significant span of time, which could not have gone unnoticed by those present at the scene. In fact, the crater itself remained unchanged for many years after the event. The buildings surrounding the impact area were visibly damaged around a radius of about 50-60 metres on both sides of the street. Sead Bešić, one of the CSB forensic officers, commenced the examination of the scene, took photographs, collected evidence and made a free-hand sketch of the scene. 

454.    The stabiliser fin from the projectile was found at about 20 metres from the crater. It was slightly damaged either by the explosion itself or by the cars that passed by the impact zone area. It was collected and analysed together with numerous shell fragments of different sizes. The investigators established that the stabiliser was that of a 120 mm light contact fuse mortar shell. Moreover, based on the inscription “MK K 74 KB 9307” it had on the back, they were also able to
determine that the mortar shell had been manufactured in July 1993 in the Krušnik factory. 

455.    As for the crater analysis, based on the features of the shrapnel traces, which were most intense and deep on the southerly side, the KDZ and forensic officers established that the mortar shell had been fired from the southern bearing of 170 degrees, with an error margin of five degrees. The KDZ officers then calculated the angle of impact of the shell on the street based on the fuse crater, the distance between the crater and the City Market building and the height of the building. They established that the minimum angle of descent was 67 degrees and that therefore the shell had impacted the surface at an angle of approximately 70 degrees. In the absence of information as to the charge used to fire the mortar projectile, however, the investigators could not
make any firm determination of the distance the shell had been fired from and its exact point of origin .
e. Casualties

456.    On the same day, after the investigations at the impact scene were concluded, the CSB team and the UNMOs went to Koševo and State hospitals to determine how many casualties had been caused by the explosions at the City Market. According to the official note drafted by the CSB investigative team on the same day, 33 dead bodies were taken to Koševo hospital and 2 to the State
hospital, for a total of 35 fatalities. Fifty-seven injured persons were admitted to Koševo hospital and 21 to State hospital. The following day, additional three persons wounded in the explosion
succumbed to their injuries, bringing the total number of fatal casualties to 38.

457.    As a result of the investigations, it was established that the following persons died as a result of the explosion: Samir Topuzović, Senad Muratović, Hajrudin Hozo, Muhamed Kukić, Zeno Bašević, Salko Duraković, Najla Fazlić, Husein Bektešević, Ilija Keranović, Ismet Klarić, Meho Zečo, 1274 Jasmina Hod`ić, Mejra Cocalić, Salko
Alić, Bla`enka Smoljan, Omer Ajanović, Vehid Komar, Adnan Ibrahimagić, Mirsad Kovačević, Hidajet Alić, Hamid Smailhod`ić, Goran Poturković, Meho
Herceglić, Mesudija Kerović, Vera Brutus, Hajrudin Šatrović, Ajdin Vukotić, Ibrahim Hajvaz, Sevda Brkan, Halida Čepić, Paša Crnčalo, Sabaheta Vukotić, Hašim Kurtović, Esad Ćorambegić, Merima Žiga, Osman Mahmutović, Rijad Gorvo and
Alija D`evlan. 

458.    The persons who were injured in the explosion and known by name were: Ethem
Husović, Rasim Farač, Osman Levanta, Feriz Kanlić, Mirza Hod`ić, Ned`ad Korjenić,
Razija Čolić, Đula Leka, Bilal Habibović, Ajkuna Cocalić, Alma Halilović, Dario Blauhi, Rada Laubuh, Muho Kadrić, Nihada Had`ijahić, Kosa Pečanac, Minela Satara, Mensuda Klarić, Adisa Duran, Aziz Had`ić, Violeta Dudić, a child named Berina, Salko Kurtović, Čarim Terzić, Mejra Marevac, Šemsa Bunjo, Sabaheta Kafrč, Indira Svoboda, Samir Borovac, Jusuf Hašimbegović, Fatima Čulesker, Rasim Koso, Hasena Kaljanac, Ismet Švraka, Andrea Svoboda, Janja Pašić, Amerisa Ahmetović, Pelka Jačimović, Mustafa Karkelja, Ned`ad Mango, Muhidin Begić, Ferida Hajrić, Šemsa Bunjo, Zijad Bejtić, Samir Marevac, Asim D`evla, D`evad Hod`ić, Murat Zahiragić, Mehmed Ahmetović, Andrija Simunović, Ru`a Galić, Izet Hard`elaš, Fehim Zolota, Amir Trnka, Ferida Bajrić, Suada
Dizdarević, Omer Zec, Suzana Sand`aktarević, Zaim Kaširić, Omer Begić, Senad Skenderović, Mahit Kurtović, Emira Guberović, Damir Mujačić, Mirsad Ademović, Ned`ad Trhulj, Halmija Crnčalo, Hamza Tunović, Selver Stomovljak, Sabit Tahirović, Hako Tahirović, Nazif Sijamć, Ibrahim Muša, Šukrija Ferović and Merd`ana Obralić. 

459.    According to the CSB investigative team, the neighbourhood where the shell landed was in the middle of the city and was a civilian area without any military activity and the victims were mainly civilian. 
f. Follow up to Investigations

460.    On 29 August 1995, the CSB investigating team had a lengthy meeting in relation to the
City Market incident to which Konings was invited as the UNMO team representative. The CSB
team discussed the investigation findings and tried to establish what had happened on 28 August
1995. In his testimony, Konings stressed that the UNMOs did not take part in the discussion and that there was no exchange of investigative notes and that each team compiled its own separate report on the incident. Rather, he participated in the meeting as an observer, “listening and comparing the data” that had been collected by the UNMOs the day before to that collected by the CSB police, which he found to be identical. During the meeting, Konings informed the CSB team of what had been observed on the morning of 28 August 1995 from the UNMO OP-1 stationed on Čolina Kapa. 
g. Expert Report

461.    The expert report of Richard Higgs confirms that the mortar shell was fired from a direction of about 170-175 degrees and that the angle of descent was closer to 70 degrees, as determined by the Bosnian authorities. 1344 According to the expert, at said angle of descent the origin of fire can be
placed at a range of 900, 1,600, 2,400 or 3,000 metres, depending on the propulsion charge used. Considering where these ranges plot on the map within the azimuth of 175 degrees and, in particular, that the UNMOs from OP-1 did not hear any mortar being fired, the expert excluded the possibility that this mortar shell had been fired from a range of 900 or 1,600 metres. The range
of 2,400 metres instead, put the firing point in a position and elevation consistent with the angle of
descent as well as with the effects seen at the impact site. The expert therefore concluded that the most likely fire position was situated at 2,400 metres to the south of the impact area. 
h. Allegations of Staged Incident

462.    Soon after the incident, allegations emerged that the shelling at the City Market had been staged and the evidence planted on the scene. However, according to Konings this was impossible. Earlier that morning, at about 8:30-9:00 hours, Konings had driven past City Market coming from the SC-1 team base in Sedrenik on his way to the UNMO headquarters in the PTT building. He noted that there had been a lot of civilians on the streets and sidewalks near the entrance of the City Market, trading or selling goods as well as the usual police patrols and
“some” military men, but he did not observe any crater on the road and he did not think it was possible to create an artificial one in about two hours. He also excluded the possibility that any other type of explosive had been detonated on the spot, as the crater he analysed, as well as the damage around it, was a “perfect” example of a 120mm mortar shell impact. Finally, he excluded the possibility that dead bodies from previous incidents had been planted on the scene, as the bodies he examined at the morgue had fresh wounds and it was clear that they had recently been killed. Konings also stated that he did not believe it was possible to stage such chaos. The Trial Chamber finds the explanation provided by Konings on this issue to be credible and convincing.

463.    Another witness testified that he was about 50 metres from the City Market when he heard the explosion and was at the scene five to ten minutes later. He stated that when he arrived at the
scene he saw “a great mess, and it was all intensely quiet … and still it was very agitated”. He also did not think it possible to stage such scene. 

464.    On 28 and 29 August 1995, General Rupert Smith had several telephone conversations with General Ratko Mladić in relation to the incident. Mladić stated that no fire orders had been issued to his units on that day and that all his positions had been checked and he was sure that none of them
had fired. Rather, he claimed that the incident had been orchestrated by the ABiH. Smith,
however, informed Mladić that “it was now beyond a reasonable doubt that the shells had come from the VRS territory and that the investigation revealed that the firing point had been approximately 3,5 – 4 km south west of the impact point”. 
i. Investigation into Other Mortar Shell Impacts in the Same Area

465.    Ned`ib Đozo, a police officer from the Stari Grad station in Sarajevo, testified that about one or two months prior to the shelling of 28 August 1995, the area had been targeted by mortar fire on two occasions. On the first occasion, one or two mortar shells fired from the VRS held
territory of Barice and Markovići to the north landed and exploded near the Markale open
market, injuring some children. On the second occasion a salvo of three mortar shells exploded, within half an hour of each other, the first about 300 metres from the Markale City Market, killing a young man, the second about 200 metres from the Markale City Market, in front of the Stari Grad municipality building, injuring several persons and the third about 30 metres from the Markale City Market, killing one person and injuring several. The investigations
established that the shots were fired from the direction of the VRS held territory of Lukavica or
Vraca, on the slopes of Mt. Trebević. Considering that these three mortar shells landed in the same line of direction towards the Markale Market, the witness concluded that the aim of these shellings was to adjust the sighting of the mortar in order to target the Markale City Market. 

466.    On 28 August 1995, the City Market shelling incident was preceded by four mortar shell impacts in the vicinity. The investigations established that 120mm mortar shells had been used in all four cases from the south, at a bearing between 220 and 240 degrees, which suggested that the point of origin of these four shells was different from that which hit the City Market. 
(v) Findings

467.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 28 August 1995 shortly after
11:00 hours, a 120mm mortar shell hit the entrance of the City Market on Mula-Mustafe Bašeskije street killing 38 persons and injuring 75 persons. The Trial Chamber also finds that the mortar shell was fired from the VRS-held territory on the slopes of Mt. Trebević. Finally, no military activities were taking place in the area of the City Market and the persons present at the market
were buying, selling or trading goods, in no way engaged in activities that could be perceived as military. In addition, the evidence shows that all the victims, except one, wore civilian clothes. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the great majority of the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities at the time the
crime occurred.
5. Scheduled Sniping Incidents
(a) 3 September 1993 (Incident B1)
(i) Indictment





3 September 1993: Nafa Tarić, a woman aged 35 years, and her daughter Elma Tarić, aged 8 years, were shot by a single bullet while walking together in Ivana Krndelja Street in the centre of Sarajevo. The bullet wounded the mother in her left thigh and wounded the daughter on her right
hand and in her abdomen. 




(ii) Findings

468.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 3 September 1993, Nafa and Elma Tarić, civilians not taking part in hostilities, were deliberately targeted and injured by a shot fired from an SRK- controlled position.
(b) 2 November 1993 (Incident B2)
(i) Indictment





2 November 1993: Two men were wounded by a burst of gunfire while they were working clearing rubbish along Braće Ribara Street, presently Porodice Ribar Street, in the Hrasno area of Sarajevo. Ramiz Velić, aged 50 years, was wounded in his left forearm, and Milan Ristić, aged 56
years, was wounded in his right arm and both legs. 




(ii) Incident

469.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 2 November 1993, Ramiz Velić, a civilian not taking part in the hostilities, was deliberately targeted from an SRK-controlled position in Vrace. The Trial Chamber notes that the facts proposed for judicial notice in relation to this incident made no reference to Milan Ristić, because no finding in relation to his wounding was made by the Galić Trial Chamber. Considering that no evidence was led in relation to Milan Ristić, the Trial Chamber
finds that the allegation regarding him has not been proved.
(c) 6 January 1994 (Incident B3)
(i) Indictment





6 January 1994: Sanija D`evlan, a woman aged 32 years, was shot and wounded in her buttocks while riding a bicycle across a bridge in Nikole Demonja Street, Dobrinja. 




(ii) Findings

470.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that the adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 6 January 1994, D`evlan was shot and wounded from an SRK-controlled area. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities.
(d) 19 June 1994 (Incident B4)
(i) Indictment





19 June 1994: Witness B-1173, a woman aged 31 years, and her son, aged 4 years, were lightly wounded in their legs by a shot that penetrated a crowded tram in which they were travelling. The tram was travelling west on Zmaja od Bosne Street towards Alpašino Polje. Witness B-1174, a man aged 36 years, sustained a slight leg wound and witness B-1175, a woman aged 23 years, was wounded in her left armpit in the same attack. The tram was near the Holiday Inn hotel at the time
of the incident. 




(ii) Findings

471.    The Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that, on 19 June 1994, a tram was deliberately targeted from an SRK-controlled territory in the area of the Jewish Cemetery, resulting in the wounding of three persons on board the tram. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victims
were civilians not taking part in hostilities.
(e) 26 June 1994 (Incident B5)
(i) Indictment





26 June 1994: Sanela Muratović, a girl aged 16 years, was shot and wounded in her right shoulder while walking with a girlfriend on Ðure Jakšića Street, presently Adija Mulabegovića, in the west end of Sarajevo. 




(ii) Findings

472.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. Considering that such adjudicated facts have not been rebutted, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that, on 26 June 1994, Sanela Muratović was deliberately shot and wounded by fire originating from territory held by the SRK and that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities.
(f) 22 July 1994 (Incident B6)
(i) Indictment





22 July 1994: Witness B-1177, a boy aged 13 years, was shot and wounded in his abdomen while window-shopping with his mother and sister in Miljenka Cvitkovića Street, presently Ferde Hauptmana, in the Čengić Vila area of Sarajevo. 




(ii) Incident

473.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of adjudicated facts related to this incident. These adjudicated facts have not been rebutted during the trial.

474.    Mirsad Kučanin, who at the time relevant to the indictment worked as the criminal inspector at the Centre for Security Service in Sarajevo, gave evidence about the investigation into this incident. 

475.    On 22 July 1994 at about 17:00 hours, Kučanin was informed via radio of an incident on the
Miljenka Cvitkovića Street, where one person was wounded. When Kučanin arrived at the site of the incident, he learned that a child had been injured with a firearm and had already been taken to
hospital. Although the direct responsibility for the investigation lay with the local police, Kučanin, as the most experienced officer present, remained at the location throughout the whole procedure in order to provide assistance and instructions on how to document the scene. The local police were almost immediately joined by an UNPROFOR team. 

476.    The bullet used by the sniper was a 7.62 mm rifle bullet. The Centre for Security Service in Sarajevo calculated the trajectory of the bullet based on the position of the holes left by the bullet on the sunshade and window. Using a special ballistic devise, the investigators were able to identify the “Pr`ulj house” on Zagorska street, in the VRS-held territory, as the origin of fire. 
(iii) Findings

477.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 22 July 1994, B-1177, a boy aged 13 at the time, was deliberately wounded in his abdomen while window-shopping in Sarajevo. The Trial Chamber also finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities and that the fire originated from territory held by the VRS.
(g) 8 November 1994 (Incident B7)
(i) Indictment





8 November 1994: Fata Guta, a woman aged 54 years, was shot and wounded in the hand while she was going with jerri-cans to collect water from the Mošćanica spring in Gazin Han, to the east of Sarajevo. 





478.    The Trial Chamber was informed by the Prosecution on 8 April 2010 that it withdrew this incident. Therefore the Trial Chamber will not make any finding in relation to this incident.
(h) 23 November 1994 (Incident B8)
(i) Indictment





23 November 1994: Hafiza Karačić, a woman aged 31 years and Sabina Šabanić, a woman aged
26 years, were both wounded in the right shoulder when the tram they were travelling on came under fire on Zmaj od Bosne, between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. 




(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

479.    The tram route at the Zmaja od Bosne Street between the Technical School and the Marshal
Tito Barracks was separated from the Miljacka River by a strip of land controlled by the ABiH. The Miljacka River was the borderline separating both warring factions. On the other bank of the Miljacka River was the Grbavica neighbourhood, held by the VRS. There were four skyscrapers which were notorious sniper locations. This area was known to be the “most dangerous location of Sarajevo” and several people had previously been wounded on the same stretch of road where the tram was hit. The tram authorities had instructed all their drivers to drive as fast as possible when they got to this area. 
(iii) Incident

480.    In the afternoon of 23 November 1994, a cold but clear day, tram 263 being driven by Huso Palo was the subject of sniper fire while it travelled westwards from the old town going towards Otoka, a new part of the town of Sarajevo, at the Zmaja od Bosne Street between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. No soldiers were on the tram, and there were no soldiers or any ABiH vehicles in the area. 

481.    It was dangerous to walk home for the snipers were always active, thus Sabina Šabanić, a
26-year old resident of Sarajevo, left work a bit early in order to catch the last tram which left
the centre at 16:00 hours. The tram was hit at an intersection, when turning towards the new railway station, as it approached the front of Marshal Tito Barracks, not far from the Holiday Inn hotel. Šabanić did not hear any shot or windows being broken. The passengers were in panic and wanted to get off the tram, but for safety reasons, the tram proceeded to a sheltered area behind the museum and Marshal Tito Barracks. 

482.    As Šabanić got off the tram alongside all other passengers, she began to lose consciousness and realised that she had been shot at. There was blood on her coat and she was unable to move her arm. The bullet entered Šabanić’s right shoulder, two inches below the top of her right shoulder, and exited at the back. 

483.    Despite the fact that Šabanić did not hear the sound of the bullets which hit the tram, she believed the shots came from the four sky-scrapers in Grbavica, as they were notorious sniper locations. Further, she also believed the shots came from that direction for she was standing in the tram, facing Grbavica. 

484.    Afeza Karačić, a.k.a. “Hafiza”, a 31-year old and resident of Sarajevo, took the same tram. Karačić was facing the back of the tram and was holding on to a pole of the tram when she
was hit by sniper fire. The bullet entered her right shoulder and exited just above her right elbow. As Karačić and all other passengers exited the tram, she stepped over a dead body. 

485.    Šabanić and Karačić were taken by the UNPROFOR soldiers to the Koševo Hospital Trauma Clinic for surgery. While in hospital, Šabanić met another injured woman who told her that she and her husband were in the same tram and that her husband had been killed. Šabanić stayed in hospital for four days and her arm was immobilised for a period of ten days since the bullet had passed straight through her right shoulder without hitting the bone. 

486.    Karačić immediately underwent surgery and spent three to four days in intensive care. She underwent another surgery three months later, and as a result of her injuries was declared 80 per cent disabled. 

487.    Palo, the tram driver, stated that although he was not sure where the shots were fired from, he believed that the origin of the fire was from the left of the tram, coming from one of the skyscrapers in Grbavica, which were approximately 200-300 metres from where the tram was hit. The Trial Chamber also took judicial notice of the fact that the origin of the fire was either the high-rise buildings on Lenjinova Street or the Metalka building, both of which were held by the VRS. 
(iv) Investigation

488.    The investigation of this incident was carried out by the Sarajevo High Court Investigating
Judge Izet Ba`darević and a team of six experts, including ballistic and forensic officers. Upon arriving at the scene, the investigating team observed that the tram was no longer there and had
been driven to the tram depot. Thus the tram was not inspected on the spot, but rather at the tram depot. 

489.    The report states that the tram was hit by one shot coming from the direction of Grbavica. Mirza Sabljica – a ballistics expert from the CSB in Sarajevo who participated in the investigation of the sniping incident – pointed out that although it was not possible to ascertain the exact place from which the bullet was fired, the investigation team was able to establish that the bullet had been fired from the area of Grbavica. He stated that looking in the direction in which
the tram was travelling; the bullet came in from the left. Witness MP-432 also stated that the
bullet entered the tram through an open window on the left hand side of the tram. The investigating team was unable to establish the angle at which the bullet entered the tram due to the lack of entry damage on the outer wall of the tram. 

490.    According to Sabljica, the bullet fragmented as it hit the upper right hand side corner of an inner window frame of the tram, thereby leaving two bullet traces at about 157 cm from the floor and at 7 cm distance from each other and wounding persons on board. According to witness MP-
432 who was part of the investigation team, it was very likely that the bullet first hit the persons before leaving traces on the body of the tram. He explained that fragmenting bullets may fragment at a given moment on their own, without the need for a direct impact. He added that although in this case, the investigating team did not find evidence that the bullet used was a fragmenting one it considered it very likely that it was. 

491.    Patrick van der Weijden, a military sniper expert witness, concluded in his report that the gun-fire originated from the Metalka building to the south of the Miljacka River. Further, van der Weijden believed that the weapon used would most likely have been a machine-gun mounted on
a bipod or tripod. According to the expert witness, a machine gun would have a better effect against a moving target, like a tram, in comparison to a sniper rifle. 
(v) Findings

492.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 23 November 1994 at around
16:00 hours, Afeza Karačić and Sabina Šabanić were each deliberately wounded on the right shoulder when the tram they were travelling on came under fire on Zmaja od Bosne Street, between the Technical School and Marshal Tito Barracks. The Trial Chamber also finds that Afeza Karačić and Sabina Šabanić were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The sniping fire came from the direction of the Metalka building to the south of the Miljacka River, which was under the control of
VRS forces. The shot was fired by a member of the VRS. 
(i) 10 December 1994 (Incident B9)
(i) Indictment





10 December 1994: Derviša Selmanović, a woman aged 49 years, was shot and wounded in the right knee while she was gathering firewood in the backyard of a house in Sedrenik Street, in the north east of Sarajevo. 




(ii) Location of the Sniping Incident

493.    Sedrenik Street is located in a residential area in the north-east of Stari Grad municipality in Sarajevo. It is overlooked by the Špicasta Stijena hill, which at the relevant time was occupied by the VRS. Špicasta Stijena was a notorious sniper position of the VRS. The ABiH had trenches facing Špicasta Stijena in particular and the Barice neighbourhood towards the
north in general. 
(iii) Incident

494.    During the conflict, sniping from Špicasta Stijena occurred practically on a daily basis for a prolonged period of time. In order to enable the inhabitants of Sedrenik to move about freely despite the constant sniping, members of the civilian protection hung out blankets and the like to prevent the snipers from Špicasta Stijena from seeing through. 

495.    Although Derviša Selmanović, a 49-year old resident of Sarajevo, was employed as a cook assistant in the ABiH, she always dressed in civilian clothes and walked to and from her place of work, which was located near the Koševo Hospital. Selmanović had gone to a friend’s house in the Sedrenik neighborhood, where she had once lived. There were no military facilities or activities in the vicinity and no fighting was going on between the warring parties. Some houses were exposed to Špicasta Stijena and were under constant fire from the snipers. 

496.    On the morning of 10 December 1994, a partly overcast day with little fog and little sun, there was sniper activity in the Sedrenik area. Around 11:00 hours, when it stopped, Selmanović went out into the yard of her friend’s house with the intention of collecting some firewood to take home. As she got to the firewood, she suddenly felt a sharp pain in her right knee and a burning sensation going down her leg. Although Selmanović did not immediately realise that she had
been hit by a sniper bullet, she instinctively sought shelter behind the house while “another 20 to 30
bullets” were fired at the house. The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the bullet was fired by a member of the VRS from the VRS-controlled area of Špicasta Stijena. 

497.    A neighbour, Ibro Bundo, helped her get to his house, where he tried to stop the bleeding from her wound by tying a piece of cord around her leg. According to Selmanović, the ambulance that was called was unable to arrive at the scene of the incident due to the constant sniper fire from Špicasta Stijena. An UNPROFOR patrol, which was nearby, helped transport her to the intersection between Sedrenik Street and R. Gorušanovića Street, where an ambulance was waiting. She was then taken to the Koševo Hospital, where she received treatment for her wound and was sent home the same day. It was established that a bullet had struck her knee from the inside and exited on the outside of her leg. 
(iv) Investigation

498.    On 10 December 1994, at around 12:00 hours, the Stari Grad Police Station was notified of a person being wounded as a result of a gunshot fired from Špicasta Stijena. An investigation team, made up of the duty officer at the police station of Stari Grad, a technician and a ballistics expert, was sent to the scene. However, due to constant gunshot fire from Špicasta Stijena, the on-site investigation was not very detailed. A neighbour provided the name of the victim and pointed out where she was wounded. Derviša Selmanović had already been taken to hospital. 

499.    Subsequently, the investigation team spoke with the victim’s doctor at the hospital. The information received that Selmanović had been hit on her left leg is reflected in the on-site
investigation report. About three months later, when the victim was able to be interviewed by the Stari Grad police, it was established that she was actually wounded on her right leg. In a video-recording made by the Prosecution in June 2006, Selmanović stated that the shooting came from her right side and that she was hit on the outside of her right leg. However, testifying in another case before the Tribunal in February 2007, she corrected that statement by admitting that she had been confused during the 2006 video-recording when pointing to her right to show the direction from which the sniping fire came. She confirmed that the shooting actually came from
her left side and that she was hit on the inner side of her right leg. 

500.    Patrick van der Weijden, an expert witness in this case, stated that the impact site was about
900 to 1100 metres away from the likely source of the gunfire. According to van der Weijden, the VRS was in possession of weapons capable of firing from this distance. 

501.    Van der Weijden believed that from the assumed firing position, the sniper would have been able to observe movement at the impact site with his naked eye. However, for targeting, magnification would probably have been necessary. He was of the opinion that the sniper used a
machine-gun, likely fitted with a tripod for better accuracy, coupled with the aid of a lens. Further, he believed that even if the sniper could not identify the target as being a civilian from the colour of the clothing, he still could have identified Selmanović by the way she was moving and the activity she was carrying out. 

502.    According to Ned`ib Đozo, a Sarajevo police officer who investigated the sniping incident, it was “impossible” that the shooting came from the soldiers of the ABiH because from their
trenches there was no line of sight to where Selmanović was injured. Moreover, Ðozo testified
that the ABiH unit was made up of locals who would not be shooting at their relatives and neighbours. 
(v) Findings

503.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 10 December 1994 at around
11:00 hours, Derviša Selmanović was deliberately injured by a sniper bullet on the inner side of her right leg. In spite of her occupation as a cook assistant in the ABiH, the Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the victim was a civilian not taking part in hostilities at the time the sniping occurred. The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that the sniper shot originated from the Špicasta Stijena hill, which was a notorious sniper position of the VRS.
(j) 27 February 1995 (Incident B10)
(i) Indictment





27 February 1995: Senad Kešmer, a man aged 31 years, Alma Čehagić, a woman aged 19 years, Alija Holjan, a man aged 55 years, and others, were shot and wounded while traveling in a westbound tram on Zmaj od Bosne. The tram was near the Tito barracks at the time. 




(ii) Incident

504.    Witness MP-229, a tram driver, stated that on 27 February 1995, there was a cease-fire in place between the VRS and the ABiH. It was a day with good visibility and fine weather. 

505.    At around 12:30 hours on that day, MP-229 was driving a tram from the centre of Sarajevo to the depot, moving westwards. Alma Mulaosmanović-Čehajić (also known as Alma Čehajić), Alija Holjan and Senad Kešmer were among the passengers of the tram. The tram was crowded, all the seats were taken and some passengers were standing. The passengers of the tram were
civilian men, women and children and one soldier, who was standing next to MP-229. 

506.    Shortly after the tram left the stop close to the Marshal Tito barracks, it came under fire. As the passengers heard the shots and the sound of broken glass, they ducked for cover. The first shots hit the rear of the tram, and as the tram kept on moving, the bullets started to hit its front part. MP-229 noticed that one woman lying on the floor was bleeding from her leg. 

507.    Mulaosmanović-Čehajić, who was standing near the third tram door and was facing the direction of the Marshal Tito barracks, explained that due to overcrowding, not all the passengers could take cover on the floor. As a result, some, including her, could only kneel down. The witness sustained a bullet wound to her arm below her left elbow. The wound was an entry and exit
wound showing that the bullet came from her back and exited towards her front. 

508.    Senad Kešmer, who was standing in the front part of the tram with his back to the south, upon hearing the shots turned his body sideways, in order to achieve minimal exposure of his body surface to fire. Nevertheless, Kešmer was hit by a piece of metal that entered the left side of his
head. He could not, however, determine whether it was a bullet or a metal part of the tram. Kešmer noticed an elderly woman near him who was wounded in the stomach. A girl was wounded on the arm, and Kešmer believed she was taken to hospital. 

509.    Alija Holjan, who was sitting on the right hand side in the middle of the tram, was hit on his right shoulder at the level of the shoulder blade. He also saw an elderly woman, who was sitting
in front of him, who was wounded. The witness stated that he was aware of four other persons injured during the shooting and that a woman who had been wounded to her leg subsequently died at the hospital. 

510.    Without stopping, MP-229 drove the tram for another 50 metres. At a sheltered place close to the university’s Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics and the police station, MP-229 opened the doors to let the passengers disembark. 
(iii) Aftermath of the Incident

511.    After the incident, some wounded passengers, including Mulaosmanović-Čehajić and
Holjan, were transported to the first aid station near the tram stop. From there, Mulaosmanović-
Čehajić went home and on the following day, she underwent treatment at a hospital. From the first aid station, Holjan was discharged to recuperate at home. He still suffers from the consequences of his wound and was declared “20% invalid”. Kešmer went to the hospital where he was told that his wound was not serious and was discharged. About three months later, he pulled a piece of metal from near his temple. 

512.    MP-229 gave evidence that she found 30 bullet holes and marks on the left hand side of the tram, just below and on the windows. According to MP-229, the shots were fired from the VRS- held territory of Grbavica. However, MP-229 conceded that the exact origin of the shots was
difficult to determine. 

513.    The eye-witnesses and victims of this incident stated that the shots were fired from the direction of the skyscrapers in Grbavica 

514.    MP-229 testified that the only military facilities in the area were the Marshal Tito barracks. According to her, it was impossible that somebody could have been shooting at the barracks and hit the tram instead. Mulaosmanović-Čehajić stated that she did not remember seeing any ABiH soldiers or installations in the surrounding area on that day, nor was she aware of any combat activity. 
(iv) Investigation

515.    Mirza Sabljica, who worked as a ballistics expert with the Sarajevo CSB, testified that shortly after the incident had taken place, he participated in an on-site investigation. From witness statements, his team was able to establish that the tram was hit as it began to move westbound from
the tram station in front of the Marshal Tito barracks in the direction of Novi Grad. Five persons,
including Mulaosmanović-Čehajić, Holjan and Kešmer were wounded in the incident. Sabljica testified that his team found eight bullet marks on the tram. Five of the bullets were found in the front section of the tram, and the other three in the middle section. In conjunction with the ballistic examination, Sabljica’s team determined that the fire originated from the fourth high-rise
building on Lenjinova Street in Grbavica. 

516.    In approximately March 1996, when the conflict had ended and the siege was lifted, Sabljica visited each of the four high-rise buildings in Grbavica on Lenjinova Street, pursuant to orders of an investigating judge and the chief of the crime prevention police. On the higher floors of the buildings in question, Sabljica found that five or six identical apartments had been redesigned to serve as sniper nests. The outer wall facing the Miljacka River in each of these apartments had small conical openings, in order to provide the sniper with a good view of the target, combined with
the safety of the apartment. Sabljica established that these conical openings provided a view of
the complete stretch of the tram tracks from the Holiday Inn to the Faculty of Natural Sciences and
Mathematics. 
(v) Findings

517.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the tram, driven on 27 February
1995 by MP-229, was deliberately hit by sniper fire near the Marshal Tito barracks. As a result, Mulaosmanović-Čehajić and Alija Holjan sustained serious wounds, while Senad Kešmer was lightly wounded. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The Trial Chamber also reached the only reasonable conclusion that the shots were fired from one of the high-rise buildings located on Lenjinova Street in Grbavica, which was under the control of the VRS at the relevant time.
(k) 3 March 1995 (Incident B11)
(i) Indictment





3 March 1995: Azem Agović, a man aged 46 and Alen Gičević, a man aged 33 years, were shot and wounded while traveling in an eastbound tram on Zmaj od Bosne. The tram was near the Holiday Inn at the time. 




(ii) Indictment

518.    On 3 March 1995, it was the Muslim holiday of Bajram. 1541 It was a bright and sunny
day. 1542 The trams in Sarajevo were allowed to run due to a cease-fire reached between the ABiH
and the VRS. On that day, Slavica Livnjak was driving a tram from the depot eastwards towards Baščaršija. The tram was crowded and contained about 100 passengers. Alen Gičević, his girlfriend and Azem Agović were among the tram passengers. Gičević had been a member of the ABiH but was demobilised nine months before. Gičević was standing on the right-hand side
of the tram, near the third door, facing the Faculty of Philosophy, the Jewish Cemetery and
Vrača. Agović was sitting in the middle, facing the rear of the tram. 

519.    At about 12:15 hours while travelling on Zmaja od Bosne street, the tram approached the area next to the Holiday Inn, where the tracks make a double ‘S’-shaped curve which forces trams to slow down. Livnjak estimated that at this point she was driving at the speed of approximately
20-25 kilometres an hour. At once, she saw that the tram ahead of hers was hit in the rear by
sniper fire, and shortly afterwards, her own tram was hit as well on its right side, in an area between the third door and the middle joint of the tram. 

520.    Gičević testified that he heard two or three shots and the sound of breaking glass before he noticed that other passengers took cover on the floor of the tram, screaming in panic. He then felt severe pain in his right knee and noticed that he was bleeding. Gičević also saw that one
man, who was sitting to his right, between the door and the middle joint of the tram, was bleeding and holding his arms crossed over his stomach. 

521.    Agović testified that after hearing the shots, he felt severe pain, as he realised that a bullet had entered his body above his left hip and exited at his right hip. He saw that a young man and a child had also been wounded. Slavica Livnjak heard that passengers were injured in the rear of the tram and later saw two injured passengers, a young and an old man. 

522.    The tram continued its ride and finally stopped when it reached a safer area at Marin Dvor, behind some containers next to the Executive Council Building and a tobacco factory. 
(iii) Aftermath and Investigation

523.    Agović, whose entire abdomen was open, was taken to the Koševo hospital, where he underwent a lengthy and complex surgery, following which he remained in intensive care for 16 days. 

524.    With the help of his girlfriend, Gičević walked for about 100 metres towards a taxi, which took him to the State Hospital, where he was treated. Two operations were necessary for the doctors to remove a bullet jacket from the bone above his knee. Gičević spent 15 days in the hospital before being discharged. 

525.    MP-229, a tram driver who arrived at the scene with her tram shortly after the incident, testified that after her arrival, shots were fired from the direction of Grbavica, which were returned by UNPROFOR. The exchange of fire went on for some fifteen minutes, in the course of which
a French UNPROFOR soldier was wounded. 

526.    Gičević, Agović and Livnjak estimated that the shots came from the south, from either the
Metalka building in Grbavica or from the Jewish Cemetery, located behind Grbavica. 

527.    The investigation conducted by the Sarajevo CSB also came to the conclusion that the shots were fired from the area of Grbavica. The investigation team found that “a single bullet” hit the tram, coming from the right side of the tram with a trajectory angle of 80 degrees in relation to the right side of the tram and 4 degrees in relation to the ground. The team also found that the bullet hit the back part of the tram, 84.5 centimetres from the centre of the tram and 153.5 centimetres from the ground. The internal damage to the tram was located at the back part of the tram, 6.5 centimetres from the centre of the tram. 

528.    In November 2006, expert witness Patrick van der Weijden visited the location. He concluded that the Metalka building in Grbavica was the most likely source of the gun-fire. Van der Weijden explained that the gun-fire could not have originated from the Jewish cemetery since the
line of sight to the incident site was blocked by several high buildings. 

529.    Van der Weijden then visited the Metalka building and measured the distance from the building to the incident site which he found to be 312 metres. Using a stop watch, van der Weijden concluded that the time the tram would have been in view of the sniper was eight seconds. 

530.    Van der Weijden testified that in his view, the weapon used in this incident was probably a machine-gun and not a sniper rifle because there were several people injured in the incident and,
although it would be possible for a sniper to fire several shots in rapid succession, it would be much
easier to do so with a machine-gun. Finally, Van der Weijden testified that he is not aware of trams being used for military purposes in Bosnia during the conflict. 

531.    Gičević and Agović both testified that at the time, there were no military institutions, military vehicles or any other military equipment present in the vicinity where the incident took place. The military facility closest to the incident site is the Marshal Tito barracks,
approximately one kilometre away. The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that both
Gičević and Agović were civilians and that visibility was sufficient for a shooter to identify the victims as civilians. 
(iv) Findings

532.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the tram, driven on 3 March 1995 by Slavica Livnjak, was deliberately hit by sniper fire in front of the Holiday Inn. The Trial Chamber also notes that the evidence shows that generally the trams were civilian vehicles not used for military purposes. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the only reasonable inference to be drawn from the evidence is that the victims were civilians not taking part in hostilities. The Trial Chamber also concludes that the shots were fired from the Metalka building in Grbavica, which was under the control of the VRS at the relevant time.
(l) 3 May 1995 (Incident B12)
(i) Indictment





3 May 1995: Šemša Čovrk, a woman aged 27 years, was shot and wounded in the abdomen while walking on Josipa Kraša Street in Novi Grad. 





533.    The Trial Chamber was informed by the Prosecution on 8 April 2010 that it withdrew this incident. Therefore the Trial Chamber will not make any finding in relation to this incident.
6. Conclusion

534.    The Prosecution submits that “from May 1992 through November 1995, the SRK carried
out a protracted campaign of artillery and mortar shelling and sniping on the civilian areas and
population of Sarajevo” which includes the crimes alleged in the Indictment. It also submits that the campaign was: (i) widespread as it resulted in the killings of “thousands of lives and the wounding of thousands more”; and (ii) systematic as the SRK “purposefully planned and attacked civilians in an assault spanning over three years”. 

535.    Furthermore, the Prosecution submits that the campaign “was planned, instigated, ordered, committed and aided by”, inter alia, Stanislav Galić, Dragomir Milošević, Čedo Sladoje and Ratko Mladić. 

536.    The Defence does not dispute that civilians in Sarajevo – on both sides of the confrontation lines – were targeted during the conflict period. However, it is the Defence position that “these findings benefit from over fifteen years of investigation, examination, and litigation” and that a conclusion about the campaign “could not be reached with such ease during the conflict”. The Defence also argues that – against the backdrop of substantial “propaganda”, “the perception of a
biased international community, and a pitched battle for the city itself” – it was reasonable to believe at the time that there was no such campaign and that “civilian casualties were legitimate collateral damage to an on-going conflict”. The Defence also emphasises that a “propaganda
war” unfolded in Sarajevo with the media presenting only “one side of the story”. Hence, it is
the Defence position that Serbs considered the media to be “unreliable and biased” and distrusted an international community which lacked impartiality during the conflict. 

537.    The Trial Chamber has to determine, at this juncture, whether the evidence is sufficient to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that there was a campaign of shelling and sniping on the civilian population as alleged in the Indictment. In this context, the Trial Chamber finds that the question raised by the Defence on what was “reasonable to believe” or “perceived” at the time of the shelling is immaterial. The Trial Chamber however deems that such question might be relevant
to the issue of whether Vuković had any knowledge with respect to the events in Sarajevo. It will thus address this issue in the section of the Judgement devoted to the Accused’s individual criminal
responsibility. 

538.    Numerous adjudicated facts admitted in this case show that between September 1992 and August 1994, “civilians were shot at almost every day” and were directly or indiscriminately attacked from SRK-controlled territory, and that the attacks on civilians “had no discernible significance in military terms”. Attacks on civilians were numerous and “as a result and at a minimum, hundreds of civilians were killed and thousands of others were injured”. It is also adjudicated that “the sniping and shelling of civilians was carried out pursuant to a deliberate campaign of attacking civilians”. The attacks on civilians from SRK-controlled territory continued from August 1994 through 21 November 1995. 

539.    It is also adjudicated that such campaign “emanated from a higher authority or at least had its approval”, that “General Galić acted in furtherance of a strategy to attack the civilian population of Sarajevo” and that Dragomir Milošević was directly involved in the shelling involving modified air bombs and mortars fired by the SRK. 

540.    The adjudicated facts admitted in this case are further buttressed by the evidence received from witnesses and documentary evidence on the siege of Sarajevo. The Trial Chamber also recalls its findings on the incidents scheduled in the Indictment showing specific instances where the SRK deliberately fired at the civilian population. 

541.    The Defence submits several arguments to rebut the existence of a campaign of sniping and shelling against civilians. The Trial Chamber dismisses these arguments for the reasons given below.

542.    The Defence argues that there were “often instances of intense fighting” between the SRK
and the ABiH and this “may have resulted in collateral damage to civilians and civilian areas”. The Defence also points out that Sarajevo’s neighbourhoods “maintained a sizeable military presence”. The Defence also argues that there were several allegations that the ABiH or the BiH
government violated the laws of war. Notably, that they: (i) were accused of shelling and sniping against their own civilians and blamed the VRS; (ii) used civilian buildings or areas to fire shells on Serbian-controlled areas; (iii) used vehicles painted in the same colour as UNPROFOR; and (iv) according to rumours, “planted bodies at crime scenes” to give “further credence to the notion of the propaganda war being waged by the Bosnian Government”. 

543.    The Trial Chamber dismisses the argument that intense fighting between the SRK and the ABiH “may have resulted” in collateral damage to civilians as it is speculative. Furthermore, the Trial Chamber finds that the Scheduled Incidents discussed above show a targeted aim at the victims while there were no hostilities, rather than a collateral damage. The Trial Chamber also
finds speculative the other Defence arguments insofar as they refer to “accusations” or “rumours”.

544.    With respect to the Defence argument regarding the ABiH military presence in Sarajevo’s neighbourhoods, the Trial Chamber recalls the evidence demonstrating that the SRK shelled often civilian areas despite the absence of any military activity or presence. 

545.    Furthermore, the accusation that the ABiH shelled its own civilians – even if proven – is related to isolated events that took place in early 1995. Similarly, the Defence allegations that the ABiH used civilian or UNPROFOR buildings or areas to fire shells on Serb-controlled areas refer to isolated incidents concentrated in January 1993, November 1994 and June 1995. The Trial Chamber finds therefore that these arguments related to the involvement of the ABiH in the conflict do not rebut the evidence on the existence of widespread sniping and shelling attacks
carried out by the SRK throughout the Indictment period. 

546.    The Defence also submits that the Tabeau report on the number of persons killed and wounded in Sarajevo between 1992 and 1995 gives no indication on the origin of fire and supports the assertion that it was “reasonable not to believe that a campaign to shell and snipe civilians existed during the Indictment period”. The Defence also points out that the numbers of casualties reported in the Tabeau report represent all ethnicities. 

547.    The Trial Chamber notes that the Tabeau report refers to the fact that the number of civilian casualties representing all ethnicities decreased between 1993 and 1995, when Vuković became Chief of the VJ General Staff. According to Tabeau, 4,043 civilians were killed during the entire siege, but only 949 civilians were killed during Vuković’s tenure as Chief of the General Staff. 1619 The Trial Chamber finds that these numbers, in light of the entire evidence of this case, do not contradict the existence of a widespread or systematic attack against the civilian population during the Indictment period. 

548.    The Trial Chamber also finds that the Defence’s argument that UNPROFOR could not confirm the number of casualties because the Bosnian Government often restricted the international community’s access to hospitals, has little or no weight in the determination of the existence of a campaign of shelling and sniping against the civilian population.

549.    In sum, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the evidence presented on the siege of Sarajevo shows beyond a reasonable doubt that from September 1992 to November 1995, the SRK launched a campaign against the civilian population of Sarajevo characterised by a widespread and systematic shelling and sniping which resulted in the killings of hundreds of civilians and the wounding of thousands of others.
7. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

550.    The Prosecution alleges that the crimes committed by the SRK from September 1992 to November 1995 were in part planned, instigated, ordered, committed, and aided and abetted by members of the 30th PC, including Ratko Mladić, Stanislav Galić, Dragomir Milošević and Čedo
Sladoje. 

551.    The Trial Chamber heard evidence that the SRK was a disciplined corps, with a rigid command structure, and that its commanders strictly executed the orders coming from the VRS Commander, Ratko Mladić. According to Rupert Smith, Mladić held a tight control over the
VRS, from the Main Staff to the lower units. He issued detailed orders to his corps, leaving little
room for latitude at the operational level. Smith stated that when an order was given at the top of the chain of command “you saw that it was executed at the bottom”. At the same time, if an event had happened on the ground, “you could be confident that it was reported up to the top of command”. MP-72 testified that Mladić was the strategist of the siege of Sarajevo. 

552.    In addition, the Trial Chamber has taken judicial notice of the fact that Stanislav Galić was the commander of the SRK from 10 September 1992 until 10 August 1994 and he reported directly to Ratko Mladić. Throughout his tenure, he was present in the Sarajevo war theatre, in close
proximity to the confrontation lines, and actively monitored the situation. Galić was in charge of
continuing the planning and execution of the encirclement of Sarajevo. 

553.    Galić was fully apprised of the sniping and shelling directed at civilians taking place in the city of Sarajevo and its surroundings. Galić issued orders to target the civilian population and the sniping and shelling of civilians was widespread and conducted over a long period of time by SRK troops. The sniping and shelling of civilians was carried out pursuant to a deliberate campaign, which must have emanated from a higher authority or at least had its approval. Galić acted in furtherance of a strategy to attack the civilian population of Sarajevo. 

554.    The Trial Chamber has further taken judicial notice of the fact that Dragomir Milošević was
Commander of the SRK from 10 August 1994 until 21 November 1995 and was directly
subordinated to Mladić. He regularly toured the confrontation lines and held a tight chain of command within the SRK. He continued to implement the pattern of sniping and shelling initiated under Galić throughout his tenure as SRK commander. Dragomir Milošević was in command and control of his troops who carried out the campaign of sniping and shelling, and was aware that crimes were committed. Finally, from 6 August 1995 until 10 September 1995, the SRK Chief of Staff Čedo Sladoje was in charge of the SRK and “issued orders in lieu of Dragomir Milošević”. 

555.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that, through the Indictment period, the SRK were under the effective control of its commander, i.e. Stanislav Galić from 10 September 1992 until 10 August
1994, Dragomir Milošević from 10 August 1994 until 21 November 1995 and Čedo Sladoje from 6
August 1995 until 10 September 1995. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that in turn during his tenure as VRS Commander, Mladić had effective control over his subordinates in the VRS, including the SRK.
8. Legal Findings

556.    The Indictment charges the Accused with murder and attacks on civilians as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Counts 2 and 4), and murder and inhumane acts as a crime against humanity (Counts 1 and 3).
(a) Crimes under Article 3 of the Statute

557.    It is not disputed that an armed conflict existed in Sarajevo between the ABiH and the VRS during the Indictment period and that the crimes which Vuković is charged with were closely related to the conflict and committed against the civilian population of Sarajevo during that period. 

558.    The Trial Chamber finds that the attacks by sniping and shelling were conducted against the civilian population and individual civilians not taking part in hostilities. These acts resulted in death or serious injury within the civilian population. The Trial Chamber further finds that these acts were carried out by SRK forces and wilfully directed against civilians, that is, either deliberately against
civilians or through recklessness.

559.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crimes of murder and attacks on civilians for Counts 2 and 4 have been established for the Scheduled Incidents described in Schedules A and B of the Indictment, save for Scheduled Incidents A4, B7 and B12.
(b) Offences under Article 5 of the Statute

560.    The Trial Chamber finds that the crimes committed in Sarajevo during the Indictment period formed part of an attack directed against the civilian population and that this attack was widespread and systematic. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the crimes committed by the SRK formed part of that attack and that the perpetrators knew of the attack and that the crimes were part of it.

561.    The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that murder and inhumane acts falling within the meaning of Article 5 of the Statute for Counts 1 and 3 were committed in Sarajevo during the Indictment period.

562.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that key VRS officers, including Mladić, Galić and Dragomir Milošević were involved in the commission of the crimes in Sarajevo by devising and implementing a campaign of sniping and shelling on civilians, which was an integral part to the siege of Sarajevo. The Trial Chamber found that the crimes committed by VRS members, under the effective control of these VRS officers, constituted murder and attacks on civilians as violation of the laws or customs of war (Counts 2 and 4), and murder and inhumane acts as crimes against humanity (Counts 1 and 3). The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that these key officers and their subordinates committed the charged crimes.

563.    The issue of whether the Accused bears responsibility for these crimes will be addressed separately.
B.

[Omitted. These facts were only relevant for superior liability, the conditions of which the Trial Chamber found not to have been met. This finding has not been appealed.]

Trial judgment
C. VLASENICA
1. Vlasenica from 1992 to 6 July 1995
(a) Vlasenica in the Beginning of the War

598.    On 12 May 1992, Radovan Karadžić gave a speech at the 16th Session of the Assembly of the Serbian People in BiH and identified six strategic objectives of the Serbian people in BiH. As discussed earlier in the Judgement, the first strategic objective was the “demarcation of the state as separate from the other two national communities”. The third strategic goal related to the areas of Vlasenica and Žepa, its aim being to establish a corridor in the Drina River valley and eliminate the Drina River as a border between the Serbian states. 

599.    Between May and June 1992, the VRS launched a series of attacks against ABiH forces in the area encompassing the eastern enclaves of Vlasenica, Goražde and Žepa. Heavy fighting in this area continued during 1992, eventually leading to a flood of refugees into the enclaves. The VRS offensive resulted in the surrounding of Vlasenica and ultimately, in its isolation, as the Bosnian
Serbs prevented food and supplies from entering the area. 

600.    On 19 November 1992, General Ratko Mladić issued VRS Operational Directive 4 which, in relevant part, ordered the Drina Corps to:





"defend … Zvornik and the corridor, while the rest of its forces in the wider Podrinje region shall exhaust the enemy, inflict the heaviest possible losses on him and force him to leave the Birač,
Žepa, and Goražde areas together with the Muslim population. First offer the able-bodied and armed men to surrender, and if they refuse, destroy them. 




(b) UN Intervention and “Safe Area” Designation

601.    UNPROFOR Commander in BiH from 1992 to 1993, General Philippe Morillon, visited
Vlasenica in March 1993. His visit corresponded with a surge in VRS operations in eastern 
Bosnia, which resulted in a flood of thousands of additional refugees into Vlasenica. The humanitarian situation was desperate. After he was prevented from leaving Vlasenica by panicked residents, General Morillon told the assembled crowd that the town was under the protection of the UN. 

602.    On 16 April 1993, the UNSC endorsed General Morillon’s statement by adopting Resolution 819, declaring that “all parties and others treat Vlasenica and its surroundings as a ’safe area’ that should be free from armed attack or any other hostile act”. The Resolution also demanded that the FRY immediately cease the supply of military arms, equipment and services to
Bosnian Serb paramilitary units in Bosnia. On 6 May 1993, the UNSC created two additional UN protected enclaves in Žepa and Goražde. The same day, UNPROFOR negotiated a cease- fire agreement between the ABiH and the VRS for the UN protected enclaves. 

603.    Both sides violated the cease-fire agreement, and in fact, the Vlasenica enclave was never demilitarised. However, despite these violations, a two-year period of relative stability followed the establishment of the enclave as a safe area before it disintegrated in 1995. 

604.    In January 1995, an UNPROFOR battalion from the Netherlands, colloquially referred to as
“DutchBat”, under the command of Colonel Karremans, was assigned to the Vlasenica enclave. Rupert Smith, UNPROFOR Commander in BiH beginning in January 1995, held a series of
meetings with RS President Radovan Karad`ić during April and early May 1995. Karad`ić asserted that the VRS would not respect the UN safe areas, claiming that they were illegal under international law. As a result of these meetings, Rupert Smith understood that the Bosnian Serbs were planning to put pressure on the safe areas and to control the UN and NATO forces by restricting their freedom of movement and access to supplies. Pyers Tucker further testified that Muslim commander Nasir Orić was vehemently opposed to demilitarisation and was launching offensive actions from inside the enclave. 
(c) Lead-up to the Military Offensive on Vlasenica

605.    On 8 March 1995, as pressure mounted to end the war, Karadžić issued Directive 7 to the VRS, outlining the strategic objectives for the VRS in the enclave. Directive 7 ordered the VRS Drina Corps: “[b]y planned and well-thought out combat operations, create an unbearable situation of total insecurity with no hope of further survival or life for the inhabitants of Vlasenica and
Žepa”. The directive also indicated that “in case the UNPROFOR forces leave Žepa and Vlasenica, the Drina Corps Command shall plan an operation … with the task of breaking up and destroying the Muslim forces in these enclaves and definitively liberating the Drina Valley region”. Karadžić further directed the troops to block UN aid convoys, as follows:





[T]he relevant State and military organs responsible for work with UNPROFOR and humanitarian organisations shall, through planned and unobtrusively restrictive issuing of permits, reduce and limit the logistics support of UNPROFOR to the enclaves and the supply of material resources to the Muslim population, making them dependent on our good will while at the same time avoiding
condemnation by the international community and international public opinion. 





606.    On 31 March 1995, the VRS Main Staff issued Directive 7/1, signed by General Mladić. Directive 7/1 was issued “on the basis of Directive No. 7” and ordered VRS forces to, inter alia, engage in “active combat operations … around the Vlasenica and Žepa enclaves”. 

607.    On 2 July 1995, Milenko Živanović, Commander of the Drina Corps, issued an order, “Krivaja 95”, to his subordinate units, the Bratunac Brigade, the Zvornik Brigade, the Milići
Brigade and parts of the Skelani Brigade, to prepare for active combat operations. General Krstić, Chief of Staff of the Drina Corps, was ordered to command the operation. The order did not include taking the town of Vlasenica, based on an assessment by the VRS Command that the conditions were not right at that moment to capture Vlasenica town. However, the plan for Krivaja 95 was to reduce the “safe area” of Vlasenica to its urban centre and to move towards the larger VRS goal of plunging the Bosnian Muslim population into a humanitarian crisis and ultimately eliminating the enclave. 
2. The Take-Over of Vlasenica

608.    The VRS offensive on Vlasenica began in earnest on 6 July 1995, when ABiH positions near Vlasenica, as well as certain UNPROFOR OPs, came under artillery fire by the VRS. On 8 July 1995, the VRS attacked the southern edge of Vlasenica, pushing back the defending ABiH
forces, and causing the DutchBat personnel to abandon their OPs. 

609.    On the evening of 8 July 1995, the shelling of the town intensified and many civilians entered Vlasenica from nearby villages in the southern part of the enclave. On 9 July 1995, the VRS advanced to just south of Vlasenica town and captured approximately 30 DutchBat personnel and four armoured personnel carriers (“APCs”). They were detained at the Hotel Fontana in Bratunac. The remaining DutchBat personnel withdrew to the enclave. With all of the
southern DutchBat OPs either captured or abandoned, the road to Vlasenica town was open. After the VRS succeeded in pushing back the ABiH and UNPROFOR forces in the “safe area”, Karad`ić issued a new order authorising the VRS Drina Corps to capture the town of Vlasenica. 

610.    On 10 July 1995, the VRS advanced towards Vlasenica, pushing the remaining DutchBat troops back to town. Later that day, an estimated several thousand civilians from the southern portions of the enclave fled to the town of Vlasenica. During the evening hours of 10 July 1995, additional VRS reinforcements, including the 10th Sabotage Detachment, arrived south of the Vlasenica enclave. 

611.    Late that evening, DutchBat Commander Lieutenant Colonel Karremans informed the mayor of Vlasenica about major NATO air strikes planned for the next morning, 11 July 1995. The Bosnian Muslim military leaders, unconvinced that such air strikes could stop the advancement of the VRS, decided to leave Vlasenica town and moved towards the northwest corner of the enclave. 

612.    While a group of Bosnian Muslims, primarily consisting of women, children and elderly men moved to the UN compounds in Vlasenica and Potočari, a second group, primarily military-aged men and ABiH members, began to assemble in the north-western part of the Vlasenica enclave, close to the villages of Šušnjari and Jaglići. This area was known as the departure point of the most direct route leading from the enclave to ABiH-held territory near Tuzla. It has been estimated that between 10,000 and 15,000 people joined this convoy and
attempted to escape Vlasenica along this route. 

613.    On the morning of 11 July 1995, NATO air strikes did not materialise for various reasons. At approximately 14:30 hours, two NATO F-16 planes bombed VRS tanks advancing towards Vlasenica; however, the attacks were halted due to poor visibility and following the VRS threat to kill the DutchBat soldiers being held hostage. By 16:00 hours, DutchBat soldiers took all of the remaining Bosnian Muslims from Vlasenica to a UN compound near Potočari. 

614.    In the early evening hours of 11 July 1995, General Mladić, accompanied by Drina Corps Commander Milenko Živanović, Chief of Staff of the Drina Corps, General Krstić, and other VRS officers, took a triumphant walk through the streets of an almost deserted Vlasenica town. 
3. 11 July 1995: Refugees Flee to the Potočari Compound

615.    During the VRS attack on the enclave on 11 July 1995 and into the morning hours of 12
July 1995, Muslim refugees began to arrive in Potočari. The Potočari compound was manned by approximately 30 soldiers, including Lieutenant Eelco Koster, a DutchBat logistics officer, and his unit, and they were tasked with taking care of the refugees. Following Koster’s request for reinforcements, additional soldiers arrived in Potočari, increasing the total number of soldiers at the compound to 50 or 60. 

616.    According to Koster, refugees arrived at the Potočari compound from Vlasenica either on foot or in UN vehicles, and were primarily women, children and elderly. They appeared to be terrified and were looking for help. Initially, the refugees were not allowed inside the compound,
and were directed into large buildings of a former bus shelter outside. Later that day, when the crowd started to increase in size, Koster’s unit allowed people into the compound in groups of 25. 

617.    Koster explained that because the road from Vlasenica to Potočari was in direct sight and line of fire of the VRS, the DutchBat personnel created a side opening in the fence so that the refugees could enter the compound out of the view of the VRS. Between 4,000 to 5,000 Bosnian Muslim refugees were brought inside, while the rest remained outside the compound, protected only by a demarcation line of red and white tape put up by DutchBat personnel. 

618.    The sick and wounded were provided with first aid, as well as food and water. The situation was dire, as it was tremendously hot and the DutchBat personnel were short of medical equipment and food. Information regarding the exact number of refugees in Potočari varies from source to source, but general indications are that a total of 25,000 to 35,000 refugees fled to Potočari. 

619.    VRS forces were positioned between 300 and 500 meters from the Potočari compound and were firing in the direction of the refugees and over their heads, causing panic among them. Koster testified that during the day, his men were fired upon by the VRS with mortar fire from approximately 50 metres away. 
4. The Establishment of Serb Authority over Vlasenica Municipality

620.    On 11 July 1995, Radovan Karad`ić, in his capacity as RS President, issued two orders related to Vlasenica: 1) appointing Miroslav Deronjić to serve as the “Civilian Commissioner for the Serbian Municipality of Vlasenica”;1774
 and 2) ordering the formation of a Public Security
Station for Serb Vlasenica. Both orders stated that citizens who engaged in combat operations
against the VRS were to “be treated as prisoners of war”, while the remainder were free to choose their place of residence or emigration. 

621.    On 14 July 1995, Radovan Karad`ić and Miroslav Deronjić held a private meeting, after which Karad`ić met with Bosnian Serbs from Vlasenica and discussed the establishment of a War Presidency for the town. At this time, the appointment of Deronjić to the position of civilian
commissioner was revoked and the War Presidency was established. Deronjić was appointed
President of the War Presidency. 

622.    On 14 July 1995, Karad`ić declared “a state of war” in the Vlasenica-Skelani municipality. On 28 July 1995, the “state of war” was expanded to include the entire territory of the RS. 
5. Hotel Fontana Meetings

623.    On the evening of 11 July 1995, two meetings were held at the Hotel Fontana in Bratunac between representatives from the DutchBat and the VRS. The first meeting was attended, inter alia, by Lieutenant Colonel Karremans, on behalf of the DutchBat, and by General Mladić, Major- General Živanović, Colonel Janković and Momir Nikolić, on behalf of the VRS. The meeting was video-recorded and lasted approximately one hour. It began with angry remarks by Mladić about the NATO air strikes. During the meeting, Mladić inquired whether buses could be provided to them through the UNPROFOR Chief of Staff in Sarajevo. The meeting ended with Mladić’s request that the DutchBat representatives arrange for Bosnian Muslim civilian and
military representatives to attend a meeting the same evening at 23:00 hours. 

624.    Karremans returned to the Hotel Fontana at 23:00 hours for a second meeting with the VRS commanders, accompanied by a Bosnian Muslim representative, Nesib Mand`ić. Also present at the meeting were Miroslav Deronjić and Ljubisav Simić, Mayor of Bratunac. The meeting was video-recorded in part. During the meeting, Mladić placed a broken signboard stating “Municipal Assembly of Vlasenica” on the table in front of everyone. The participants in the meeting interpreted the gesture to mean that the protected area of Vlasenica was taken and that the civilian population could no longer stay there. Mladić promised that everyone, regardless of their age and sex, would be evacuated according to their wishes. Mladić further addressed Nesib Mand`ić personally, stating in a threatening language:





I need to have a clear position of the representatives of your people on whether you want to survive, stay, or disappear, and I am prepared to receive a delegation tomorrow of responsible people from the Muslim side here, at 1000 hours, with whom I can discuss the salvation of your
people from the enclave, the former enclave of Vlasenica. 





625.    The next morning, 12 July 1995, a follow-up and final meeting between the DutchBat and VRS was held at the Hotel Fontana. The purpose of the meeting was discussed very early that morning, between 07:00 and 07:30 hours, between Mladić, Deronjić, Ljubisav Simić, President of the Bratunac municipality, and Dragomir Vasić, Chief of the Security Centre in Zvornik. At 10:00 hours, the DutchBat officers arrived together with Nesib Mand`ić and two additional Bosnian Muslim representatives for the Potočari refugees: Ibro Nuhanović and Ćamila Omanović. From the Bosnian Serb side, the participants included, inter alia, Mladić, Krstić,
Vujadin Popović, Janković, Svetozar Kosorić, Drina Corps Chief of Intelligence, Momir
Nikolić, Bratunac Brigade Assistant Commander for Intelligence and Security, as well as Deronjić
and Miroslav Simić. 

626.    At the meeting, Mladić insisted that he wanted “absolute cooperation from the civilian population”, and that for their survival, all of the “armed men who attacked and committed crimes” must hand over their weapons. While specifically addressing the representatives of the Bosnian
Muslim population, Mladić repeated that they “can choose to stay, or leave if [they] wish[ed]”. The Bosnian Muslim representatives made it clear that they wanted to leave Vlasenica, and be escorted by the DutchBat forces to safety. 

627.    The meeting finished between 11:00 and 11:30 hours. Deronjić testified that the meeting, recorded by TV cameras, was “some kind of … smoke screen for the public”, because most of the contacts with Bosnian Muslims and most decisions had been made outside of this meeting. 
6. Transfer of Population
(a) Organisation of Buses

628.    Shortly after the 12 July 1995 meeting at the Hotel Fontana, VRS personnel, as well as the RS MUP Special Police, started to arrive in Potočari to search and secure the area. On the morning of 12 July 1995, VRS and RS civilian authorities began to mobilise buses. 

629.    General Krstić, working in close co-operation with military officials of the VRS Main Staff and the Drina Corps, played a significant role in organising the transportation operation. General Krstić ordered the procurement of buses for the transportation of the Bosnian Muslim population from Potočari on 12 and 13 July 1995, including an order for 50 buses to arrive in Vlasenica from nine different municipalities. Three additional orders regarding transport were issued by the RS MOD. 

630.    Buses and trucks were assembled from, inter alia, Ilijaš, Pale, Sokolac, Bratunac, and Bratkovići and ordered to arrive at Bratunac stadium on 12 July 1995. There was a serious shortage of fuel in RS and other areas; thus, obtaining enough fuel to support the movement of the entire civilian population out of Potočari presented a critical issue. The Bratunac Brigade Command logistically supported the transportation operation by disbursing and accounting for fuel;
ultimately, a minimum of 4,700 litres of diesel fuel was provided to the transportation fleet assembled in Potočari on 12 July 1995. Krstić also issued orders to his subordinates regarding securing the road along which the buses would travel to Kladanj, as well as to secure the location where the Bosnian Muslims would disembark. 

631.    As the buses arrived in Potočari, a number of VRS officers, including Mladić, Živanović, Krstić, as well as a number of other Main Staff and Drina Corps personnel, arrived at the Potočari compound to personally observe the situation. RS Municipal Police and RS Special Police units
were also present. At least two video cameras filmed these events on 12 July 1995. 
(b) Separation of Refugees

632.    The Trial Chamber took judicial notice of the fact that the separation of refugees was part of a plan devised and implemented by the Bosnian Serb forces to transport all of the Bosnian Muslim women, children and elderly out of the enclave. According to Momir Nikolić, on the morning of
12 July 1995 in front of the Hotel Fontana, Colonel Popović informed him that all Bosnian Muslim women, children and men unfit for military service would be transported to Bosnian Muslim- controlled territory, while the “able-bodied Bosnian Muslim men will all have to be killed”. Nikolić received similar information from Colonel Kosorić and was informed that he would be involved in the separation of the able-bodied Bosnian Muslim men from the group. 

633.    Between 12:00 and 13:00 hours on 12 July 1995, Mladić arrived in Potočari and entered the area occupied by the crowd of refugees. After Mladić's departure, VRS personnel began separating the Bosnian Muslim men from the women, children and elderly. Nikolić participated in the separation process, along with other members of the Bratunac Brigade. The presence of armed members of the Bratunac Brigade contributed to the atmosphere of fear and terror in Potočari. 

634.    At approximately 16:00 hours on 12 July 1995, VRS soldiers, including General Mladić, arrived at Koster’s position at the Potočari compound with additional jeeps and civilian vehicles. Koster asked Mladić what he was planning to do, but Mladić did not reply and walked past the
demarcation tape towards the refugees. Koster asked Mladić several times to go to the
compound to talk to Colonel Karremans; however, Mladić refused, stating: “No. I am doing what I please to do and I am in charge here and nobody tells me what to do, and I am outside here and you will see what is going to happen”. Mladić also informed Koster that the DutchBat soldiers would
be better off if they co-operated with him. 

635.    Outside the gates of the base, Mladić spoke to the crowd gathered at Potočari, stating: “ d o not panic. You will all be safe. You will all be evacuated to the areas that are under the control of the BiH army. First the old and the infirm, then mothers with their children, and then everybody
will follow as well”. 

636.    Later that day, MP-227 observed a long line of buses outside the Potočari base, waiting to be loaded with women, children and the elderly. The Bosnian Serbs forced them onto the buses, while kicking and yelling at them. Koster asked General Mladić what he was going to do and he replied that he was going to evacuate the refugees to another place. 

637.    The Bosnian Serbs continued to put more people in the buses and began driving them away. Koster’s men attempted to escort the buses and trucks. However, at control-points manned by Bosnian-Serb police or military personnel, the UN soldiers were disarmed, their vehicles were confiscated and they could no longer accompany the buses outside of the compound. 

638.    The Bosnian Muslim men who had been separated from the women, children and elderly in Potočari were first taken to the “White House”, located across the road from the UN compound in
Potočari. Their personal belongings were left outside and were subsequently burned. VRS soldiers were responsible for guarding these men, before they were brought to Bratunac. RS MUP Special Police were also present in the area. 

639.    While at the Potočari compound, MP-277 witnessed nearby houses torched. He believed it was to frighten the population and prevent them from returning. He testified that he heard shots and screams outside the compound during the night of 12 July 1995. During the same evening, VRS soldiers confiscated weapons and military gear from approximately 30 to 40 DutchBat soldiers including Koster, at gun point, as they attempted to guard refugees outside the compound. 

640.    On the morning of 13 July 1995, the loading of bus and truck convoys leaving Potočari resumed at about 07:00 hours. At about 15:00 hours, Belgrade journalist Zoran Petrović filmed one group of refugees preparing to board the buses. As shown by the video, the VRS was manning both the separation lines, and guarding access to the buses to ensure that military-aged Bosnian Muslim males did not board. By 20:00 hours on 13 July 1995, the removal of the Bosnian Muslim refugee population from the Potočari compound was complete. Ultimately, thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilian women, children and elderly men were bussed out of Potočari and other areas surrounding Vlasenica to non-Serb areas of BiH. 

641.    The buses transferred the women, children and the elderly from Potočari through Bratunac, along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road, through Milići, Sarajevo to Tišća. At Tišća, the
refugees disembarked and walked through a tunnel to Bosnian-Muslim controlled territory. Thereafter some of the refugees arrived at Bosnian Muslim-held territory in and around Kladanj. 
(c) Column of Military-Aged Men

642.    The refugees assembled at the UN compound in Potočari did not constitute all of the Bosnian Muslims at the enclave. From the evening of 10 July 1995, ABiH soldiers and Bosnian Muslim men began to assemble in an area located northwest of Vlasenica at the departure point for the most direct route to ABiH-held territory near Tuzla. Between 10,000 and 15,000 military- aged men, including both soldiers and civilians, formed a column and attempted to escape along this route. The column of the military-aged men heading towards Tuzla is shown on two
videos. 

643.    On 12 July 1995, the column began to move through former ABiH smuggling routes. The Bosnian Serb military knew this route, and was therefore able to set up ambushes. 

644.    The largest number of Bosnian Muslim men from the column were captured on 13 July 1995 by MUP units along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road, which ran through Glogova, Kravica and Sandići. Several thousand men were collected at, or near, the Sandici Meadow and the Nova Kasaba football field, at the intersection of Konjević Polje road and a meadow in Jaglići. 

645.    According to Richard Butler, the Bosnian Serb military leadership assessed that one third of the column was armed, but it underestimated the size and the potential threat of this column. Therefore, on 15 and 16 July 1995, additional reinforcements were rushed to the Zvornik battlefield area. Nevertheless, on 16 July 1995, in accordance with a decision made by Colonel Pandurević, the Zvornik Brigade declared a cease-fire for 24 hours and allowed approximately 5,000 men from the column to pass through the VRS lines into Bosnian-Muslim held territory. 

646. The 2nd Šekovići Detachment, which formed part of the MUP and was under the command of Borovčanin, as well as the 1st Special Police Units (“PJP”) and the 65th Protection Regiment, under the command of Major Zoran Malinić, were deployed along Bratunac-Konjević Polje road. 

647.    The VRS and the RS Police Units stole and used UN equipment, which may have caused men from the column to believe they were putting themselves into the custody of the UN when they were, in fact, surrendering to the Bosnian Serbs. 
7. Detention and Killings of Bosnian Muslim Men
(a) General

648.    The parties agreed that over a seven-day period from 12 July 1995 until approximately 19 July 1995, VRS and MUP forces participated in a planned and organised mass execution and burial of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men from the Vlasenica enclave. This organised killing operation occurred in several different locations in and around Vlasenica, Bratunac and Zvornik. Some Bosnian Muslim men were killed individually or in small groups by the soldiers who captured them and others were killed where they were temporarily detained. As will be analysed further below, the victims’ bodies were buried in several areas, some of them close to the execution sites.

649.    Between August 1995 and October 1995, the VRS reburied many victims of the mass executions in remote secondary locations to hide the evidence. This reburial operation was ordered by the VRS Main Staff, directed by Colonel Beara, Chief of Security of the Main Staff, and Lieutenant Colonel Popović, Assistant Commander for Security of the Drina Corps. On the ground, the operation was carried out by the Bratunac and Zvornik Brigades. 

650.    Within the Bratunac Brigade, Momir Nikolić, the Chief of Security and Intelligence, was tasked with organising the operation; while within the Zvornik Brigade, Assistant Commander for Security Drago Nikolić, was in charge of the reburials. The VRS Main Staff provided fuel to the Zvornik Brigade for the reburial operation and allocated the task of maintaining the records of
fuel distribution to Captain Milorad Trbić, security officer in the Zvornik Brigade. 
(b) Number of Missing Persons

651.    Helge Brunborg, a demographer and expert witness, testified about the total number of missing persons involved with the fall of the enclave of Vlasenica. According to Brunborg, as of 21 November 2005, approximately 7,661 people were identified as missing based on reports from family members. Brunborg noted, however, that some were never reported by their relatives as missing, in some cases because the whole family was killed. It follows that the total number of missing people is probably higher. Based on DNA analysis, 2,694 persons were found and identified in mass graves in the area of Vlasenica. Brunborg removed 103 people from this list due to uncertainty as to the date they went missing. Ultimately, Brunborg concluded that there were 2,591 victims out of the total 7,661 people considered missing. The Trial Chamber finds Brunborg’s conclusions regarding the number of missing people associated with the events in Vlasenica to be reliable.

652.    The Trial Chamber will now turn to discuss the detention and killing of Bosnian Muslim men as charged in the Indictment.
8. Potočari Area (12–17 July 1995)
(a) “Opportunistic” Killings near the UN Compound

653.    The parties agreed that the bodies of nine men were discovered on 12 July 1995 in Budak, in a field near the river, on the west side of the main road, about 500 metres from the UN Compound. The parties further agreed that on the morning of the same day, an additional nine or ten male corpses were found approximately seven hundred meters from the UN Compound. The bodies were located behind the “White House” in the vicinity of an electrical station near a creek. 

654.    The parties agreed that on 13 July 1995, the bodies of six Bosnian Muslim women and five Bosnian Muslim men were found in a stream near the Express Bus Company Compound in Potočari. The same day, one Bosnian Muslim man was taken behind a building near the “White House” and summarily executed. 

655.    The Trial Chamber recalls that members of the VRS and MUP were in Potočari between 12 and 13 July 1995 and carried out the separation of men from the women, children and elderly. The men were put inside a building called the “White House” before being transported to Bratunac. There is evidence that on 12 July 1995, VRS soldiers separated Bosnian Muslim men from the group in Potočari and they were never seen again. Shots and screams were also heard during the night of 12 July 1995. In light of the overall evidence, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that VRS and/or MUP forces carried out killings of Bosnian Muslims
near the UN Compound, in the area of Budak and near the “White House” building.
(b) Mass Execution near the Cinkara Zinc Factory

656.    Witness MP-443, a Bosnian Muslim man, testified that on 12 July 1995, he watched the execution of approximately 80 to 100 Bosnian Muslim men, by decapitation, in the open area between the Cinkara Zinc factory and “Alija’s House”. 

657.    MP-443 testified that on 11 July 1995, he fled to Potočari when his village was attacked by, what he described as, “Chetniks”. He spent the first night together with his family and “thousands of people” in the Cinkara Zinc factory. The following day, 12 July 1995, the situation appeared to be calmer and people, including the witness, came out of the factory and went into the woods above Cinkara. At some point, the witness saw “Chetnik” soldiers in military camouflage uniform approaching. Many of the refugees fled to Cinkara and were followed by the soldiers. MP-433, and another individual by the name of Džemal Karić, hid in a shed by “Alija’s House”. 

658.    From “Alija’s House”, MP-443 observed a group of seven to nine soldiers put planks together to resemble what he described as a “raft” in the compound between the Cinkara zinc factory and “Alija’s House”. The soldiers brought a group of four to seven people out of the factory to the raft. The soldiers forced their heads onto the raft and cut them off with axes. MP-443 counted the bodies as this was happening and arrived at a total of 83 people. The soldiers then piled the dead bodies onto a truck and covered them with hay. According to MP-443, two additional groups of people were taken out of the factory and executed after he and Karić stopped counting. MP-443 further stated that all the victims were civilians. The execution apparently came to an end when an officer arrived and admonished the soldiers for what they were doing. 

659.    MP-443 described the soldiers as wearing “multicolour” camouflage military uniforms, and that they were clean-shaven and belonged to the “Serbian” army. He further testified that: “I don’t know whether they were from Bosnia or Serbia. I didn’t come close to them…I didn’t know where they had come from. I didn’t come close to them, I couldn’t tell”. 

660.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that the Prosecution has failed to prove the allegation in paragraph 3.1 of Schedule D of the Indictment. The Defence submits that none of the forensic investigation and pathology reports related to sites in Vlasenica tendered by the Prosecution refer to decapitated heads or bodies and, therefore, that the testimony of MP-443 in this regard is not
corroborated. 

661.    The Trial Chamber does not find that the fact that the forensic reports in evidence fail to mention decapitations at Vlasenica grave sites adversely affects this aspect of MP-443’s testimony. The evidence of a single witness on a material fact does not, as a matter of law, require corroboration. However, the Trial Chamber has carefully analysed such evidence before relying upon it to a decisive extent. The Trial Chamber finds that there is sufficient evidence to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that on 12 July 1995, at least 83 Bosnian Muslims were decapitated and executed by a group of soldiers between the Cinkara Zinc factory and Alija’s House. However, based on MP-443’s testimony which referred generally to “Chetnik” soldiers, as well as further evidence that paramilitary forces were in the area at this time, the Trial Chamber cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that this group of soldiers were members of the VRS or the MUP.
9. Bratunac Area (12-15 July 1995)
(a) General

662.    On 12 and 13 July 1995, a large number of buses and trucks with detained Bosnian Muslims from several areas, including Potočari and Konjević Polje, arrived in Bratunac. This included men detained by the VRS at Potočari and along the Bratunac-Kravica-Konjević Polje road. The buses parked in the very centre of the town and the detained men were transferred to a stadium, a hangar and the Vuk Karad`ić school. Once they were full, the rest of the detainees remained on the buses parked outside of these locations. 

663.    The Vuk Karadžić School and the various surrounding buildings were secured by several units of the VRS and the MUP, as well as members of paramilitary formations. 
(b) Meetings in Bratunac on 13 July 1995 Discussing the Execution of Prisoners

664.    On 13 July 1995, Dragomir Vasić, Head of the Public Security Centre in Zvornik, met with Miodrag Josipović, the Chief of the Bratunac Police, at the Bratunac police station. Josipović informed Vasić that a large group of Bosnian Muslims had surrendered to the VRS on the Bratunac- Konjević Polje road and had been brought to Bratunac. Josipović further informed Vasić that the VRS command had ordered that prisoners be put in the school, in the stadium and on buses. Josipović noted that there was a problem in guarding these prisoners and as such, they had assembled all men fit for military service in Bratunac to assist in securing prisoners. 

665.    Miroslav Deronjić stated that on the evening of 13 July 1995, Ljubiša Beara appeared in his office, accompanied by several soldiers. Beara stated something to the effect that he had come because of the captured Bosnian Muslims, and that they should all be killed. This evidence is corroborated by Momir Nikolić and Dragomir Vasić. In fact, Vasić testified that Beara informed him that he had received an order from Mladić, stating that all of the Bosnian Muslim prisoners should be killed. Nikolić also testified that when he asked Mladić on 13 July 1995 about the fate of the captured Bosnian Muslims, Mladić drew his hand across his chest in a gesture that Nikolić understood to mean that they should be killed. 

666.    Momir Nikolić also testified about the same meeting in Deronjić’s office. He explained that on the evening of 13 July 1995, he accompanied Beara to the SDS party offices in Bratunac where Deronjić’s office was located. Nikolić waited in one office while Deronjić, Beara and Vasić spoke in another. 

667.    The Trial Chamber notes that it has exercised caution in attributing weight to Miroslav
Deronjić’s evidence on this point because of Rule 92 quater procedures. By the same token, the Trial Chamber has adopted a very prudent approach to the evidence of Momir Nikolić and Dragomir Vasić because of their involvement in the events in Vlasenica. However, unlike with Deronjić, the Trial Chamber had the benefit of hearing the testimony of Nikolić and Vasić. The evidence given by these three witnesses is mutually corroborative. Therefore, the Trial Chamber finds the evidence regarding the involvement of Mladić and Beara in deciding to kill the Bosnian Muslim prisoners in Bratunac to be credible and reliable.
(c) Vuk Karad`ić School

668.    The parties agreed that between 12 and 14 July 1995, more than 50 Bosnian Muslim men were summarily executed in and around the Vuk Karad`ić School. The parties agreed that between 13 and 15 July 1995, a number of men were taken from the Vuk Karad`ić School and murdered, and furthermore, that one mentally retarded Bosnian Muslim man, who was detained in a bus parked in front of the Vuk Karad`ić School, was taken off the bus and executed on 13 July 1995. 

669.    MP-294, a detainee at the Vuk Karad`ić School on 13 July 1995, testified about the events that took place there on 13 July 1995. He observed a Bosnian Muslim man being beaten with a rifle, after which he was taken away and executed. MP-294 also observed Bosnian Muslim men being removed from the school and heard crying outside, followed by gun shots. 

670.    The parties agreed that VRS and/or MUP forces planned organised killing operations in several different locations, including in Bratunac. Based on the foregoing evidence and considering that members of the VRS and MUP were among those guarding the Bosnian Muslims in the Bratunac area, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that members of the VRS and/or MUP participated in the detention and the summary execution of Bosnian Muslim men detained in and around Vuk Karad`ić School. 
(d) Jadar River (13 July 1995)

671.    In relation to this incident, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was led as to the alleged killing of Bosnian Muslim men on the bank of the Jadar River. Moreover, in its Final Trial Brief, the Prosecution submits that it did not present evidence on this incident and therefore, no longer relies on it. Consequently, the Trial Chamber makes no finding in connection with this incident.
(e) Cerska Valley (13 July 1995)

672.    The parties agreed that in the early afternoon on 13 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP forces transported approximately 150 Bosnian Muslim men to an area along a dirt road in the Cerska Valley, about three kilometres from Konjević Polje. There, they summarily executed the Bosnian Muslim men and, using heavy equipment, covered them with dirt. Intercepted VRS communications further show that a VRS officer requested a bulldozer or backhoe to be sent to
Konjević Polje. 

673.    Forensic analysis was conducted at the Cerska mass grave, concluding that it contained the remains of 150 males, ranging in age from 14 to 50 years old; 147 of them were dressed in civilian clothes. Based on the autopsy results, 149 of the 150 victims died of gunshot wounds. 

674.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 13 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP members executed about 150 Bosnian Muslim men in an area along a dirt road in the Cerska Valley, and subsequently buried them in a mass grave. 
(f) Nova Kasaba (13 July 1995)

675.    A group of prisoners captured along the Bratunac-Konjević Polje road on 13 July 1995 was assembled at a football field at Nova Kasaba, approximately five kilometres south of Konjević Polje. They were guarded by soldiers of the Military Police Battalion of the VRS 65th Protection Regiment. 

676.    The Trial Chamber also received evidence that at a meeting in Pale on 14 July 1995, Deronjić provided Karad`ić with his estimates of the number of men captured in Bratunac, as well as further information regarding his knowledge of “the killings in the school” and “other liquidations” on “the Konjević Polje – Kasaba road”. In particular, Deronjić stated that he observed a large number of Bosnian Muslims in Kasaba. 

677.    The Trial Chamber notes that Deronjić’s evidence with respect to these killings is corroborated by the exhumation and forensic analysis of 33 bodies found in this area. Specifically, on 27 July 1995, the United States Government took an aerial photograph of an area near Nova Kasaba, which showed the presence of disturbed earth in four distinct locations. Four undisturbed graves in the Nova Kasaba area were exhumed in July 1996. The graves, located in two fields, contained the bodies of 33 male victims. Twenty-seven of the men had their hands tied behind their
backs. 

678.    In light of the foregoing, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the 33 Bosnian Muslim male victims found in the primary graves discovered in 1996 were part of the group of prisoners assembled at the football field at Nova Kasaba. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that they were killed by VRS and/or MUP personnel on 13 July
1995.
(g) Glogova (17–27 July 1995)

679.    The parties agreed that in the year 2000, the bodies of 12 men were found in the “Glogova
L” grave and that the victims had been tied together and shot. However, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was presented in the case with respect to this incident. Therefore, the Trial
Chamber makes no finding in relation to this incident. 
(h) Kravica Market (13–14 July 1995)

680.    From the group of prisoners assembled at Nova Kasaba, a group of Bosnian Muslim men were placed on a large truck on 13 July 1995 and transported to Kravica along the main road between Konjević Polje and Bratunac. The parties agreed that in Kravica, trucks stopped at a supermarket on 13 July 1995, and that later, the soldiers guarding the truck started mistreating the detainees inside, hitting them through the canvas of the truck. 

681.    Richard Butler noted that the area in and around the municipality of Bratunac was under the zone of operation of the Bratunac Brigade. There was a significant MUP presence in the municipality, and particularly along the Bratunac-Sandići road to Konjević Polje. 

682.    In the Indictment, the Prosecution alleges that executions were perpetrated by the VRS and/or MUP personnel at Kravica Market. The Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that members of the VRS and/or MUP were responsible for the mistreatment of Bosnian Muslim detainees in Kravica Market on 13 and 14 July 1995. However, the Trial Chamber notes that no evidence was presented as to the fate of the Bosnian Muslim detainees at Kravica Market. Therefore, the Trial Chamber cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the detainees were executed by VRS and/or MUP personnel at Kravica Market on 13 and 14 July 1995.
(i) Kravica Warehouse (13 July 1995)

683.    On 13 July 1995, the Bosnian Muslim men captured from the column and assembled at the Sandići meadow were brought to a large warehouse in the village of Kravica (“Kravica warehouse”). Members of the MUP were responsible for transporting the prisoners. The executions at the Kravica warehouse complex started around 17:00 hours. The soldiers used automatic weapons, hand grenades and other weaponry to kill the Bosnian Muslims detained inside the warehouse. Over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were summarily executed. Between 14 and 16 July 1995, several trucks arrived and removed the victims’ bodies and placed them in two large mass graves in nearby villages, Glogova and Ravnice. Elements of the Bratunac Brigade, as well as members of the Engineering Company of the Zvornik Brigade, participated in the burial of the victims. 

684.    Moreover, Miroslav Deronjić received a report that a large number of Bosnian Muslims had been killed in an agricultural cooperative in Kravica. The Trial Chamber notes that the evidence given by Miroslav Deronjić on these killings is corroborated further by expert forensic reports based on exhumations of the burial sites, as follows.

685.    Exhumations and forensic analysis were conducted both in Glogova and Ravnice. Glogova was found to be a complex of burial sites. In 1999, bodies were exhumed at five burial sites (“Glogova 2 to Glogova 6”); another burial site was exhumed in 2000 (“Glogova 1”); and finally, an additional three were exhumed in 2001 (“Glogova 7 to Glogova 9”). A secondary grave was
found in Zeleni Jadar, a region south of Vlasenica, possibly containing at least some victims from the Glogova primary site. In 2001, exhumations of secondary graves were conducted in Visoko. 

686.    Exhumations of secondary graves were conducted in Ravnice in 2000 and 2001. Ravnice was only a few kilometres away from the large grave at Glogova and differed from it in that the bodies in the Glogova grave were not buried in the ground, but rather spread out on a steep, wooded embankment running down to a stream below. 

687.    In addition, forensic expert Richard Wright visited a suspected mass grave just west of the main road at Konjević Polje and concluded that the evidence was consistent with there being a mass grave at this site. Wright also attended a site north of Vlasenica, east of a bus station in Potočari, and examined the area with a backhoe. He concluded that there had been a large hole dug in this area and later refilled. Although there were no human remains present, he found small patches of clay that had likely been in contact with putrefying flesh. Wright determined that although the evidence recovered from the scene was consistent with the theory that this was a grave that had been emptied and later refilled, it was not conclusive. 

688.    The Trial Chamber finds that sufficient evidence was presented to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that on 13 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were detained in a warehouse in Kravica and summarily executed by VRS and/or MUP members with automatic weapons, hand grenades and other weapons. In addition, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the victims of the Kravica execution were buried in the Glogova and Ravnice mass graves, and in a secondary mass grave in Zeleni Jadar.
10. Zvornik Area
(a) Transfer from Bratunac to the Zvornik Municipality

689.    On the morning of 14 July 1995, Bosnian Muslim prisoners were transferred from Bratunac to Zvornik by members of the Bratunac Brigade Military Police. Momir Nikolić gave the instructions to the Military Police to escort the buses to Zvornik. The Zvornik Brigade was aware of plans to transport Bosnian Muslim prisoners into its zone of responsibility. According to Momir Nikolic, at some point during the evening of 13 July 1995, Colonel Beara ordered him to inform Drago Nikolić, the Assistant Commander for Security of the VRS Zvornik Brigade, that he should prepare for the reception and execution of captured Bosnian Muslim men in Zvornik. 

690.    On 14 July 1995, Drago Nikolić informed Dragan Obrenović that he had been instructed by Lieutenant Colonel Popović, Chief of Security of the Drina Corps, to prepare for the arrival of a large number of prisoners who were being transferred from Bratunac to Zvornik to be executed. Drago Nikolić said that this order came personally from General Mladić and that “everybody knew about it, including the commander of the Zvornik Brigade , Lieutenant Pandurević”. The order to execute would be implemented by Colonel Beara and Lieutenant Colonel Popović, with the involvement of Drago Nikolić. Drago Nikolić then asked Dragan Obrenović to place the Zvornik Brigade Military Police at his disposal. After informing him that the Military Police were already deployed, Dragan Obrenović told him he would “see what he could do” about at least placing the Military Police commander and a platoon at Drago Nikolić’s disposal. 
(b) Orahovac (14 July 1995)

691.    In the early afternoon on 14 July 1995, members of the Bratunac Brigade Military Police participated in the transfer of hundreds of Bosnian Muslim males from Bratunac to the Grbavci School in Orahovac. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave, or had been separated in Potočari. 

692.    Soldiers from the Zvornik Brigade command and the 4th Battalion of the Zvornik Brigade assisted in guarding the prisoners at the Grbavci School in Orahovac. Members of the military police company of the Zvornik Brigade were present immediately prior to the executions, presumably to guard the prisoners and then facilitate their transfer to the execution fields. 

693.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, VRS personnel guarded and blindfolded the Bosnian Muslim males detained at Grbavci School and transported them to a nearby field; there, VRS personnel ordered the prisoners off the trucks and summarily executed them with automatic
weapons. Members of the 4th Battalion, as well as members of the security organ of the Zvornik
Brigade, were also present at Orahovac during the executions. 

694.    The parties agreed that approximately 1,000 Bosnian Muslim males were killed and that on 14 and 15 July 1995, VRS members of the Zvornik Brigade used heavy equipment to bury the bodies in mass graves at the execution site, while the executions continued. They used machinery and equipment belonging to the Engineers Company of the Zvornik Brigade to bury the bodies. 

695.    On 15 July 1995, Beara contacted General Živanović and General Krstić to request assistance in the Zvornik Brigade area for “3,500 parcels” that he “ha d to distribute and had no
solution”. 

696.    On 16 July 1995, Colonel Slobodan Čerović, Assistant Commander for Morale, Legal and religious affairs for the Drina Corps, and Colonel Ljubiša Beara, Chief of Security of the VRS Main Staff, discussed the fact that “triage has to be done on the prisoners”. Expert witness Butler testified that the term “triage” in that context is associated with the execution of the prisoners. 

697.    Deronjić also stated that it was “obvious to him that the Muslims who had been taken to Zvornik had been killed”. Based on these conversations, and in light of the general evidence showing the presence of thousands of Bosnian Muslim prisoners in the Zvornik Brigade area, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that Beara was referring to the execution of the Bosnian Muslim men in Orahovac.

698.    The evidence before the Trial Chamber is corroborated by forensic evidence collected from the mass grave sites at: Lažete (Lažete 1 and Lažete 2), a location near Orahovac, and secondary graves located along the Hodžici road (Hodžici Road 3, 4, 5). 

699.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were detained in Grbavci School near Orahovac, and subsequently blindfolded and transported to a nearby field, and later executed by VRS members. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 and 15 July 1995, members of the VRS used heavy equipment to bury the bodies near the Lazete execution site. These remains were later moved to secondary graves along Hodžici Road. 
(c) Petkovci School and the Dam (14 July 1995)

700.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP personnel transported at least
1,000 Bosnian Muslim males from detention sites in and around Bratunac to the school at Petkovci. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave or separated in Potočari. On 14 July 1995, and in the early morning hours of 15
July 1995, VRS and/or MUP personnel struck, beat, assaulted and shot with automatic weapons some of the Bosnian Muslim males detained at the school. 

701.    The parties agreed that on or around the evening of 14 July 1995 and in the early morning hours of 15 July 1995, VRS personnel from the 6th Infantry Battalion (Zvornik Brigade) transported the remaining surviving members of the original group of 1,000 Bosnian Muslim males, from the school at Petkovci, to an area below the Dam near Petkovci. The men were then assembled below the Dam and summarily executed by VRS and/or MUP soldiers with automatic weapons. The parties further agreed that on the morning of 15 July 1995, VRS personnel used excavators and other heavy equipment to bury the victims. The Zvornik Brigade Engineer Company was assigned to work with earthmoving equipment to assist with the burial of the victims from the Petkovci Dam. 

702.    From April to May 1998, an exhumation was conducted at the “Petkovci Dam” site. Forensic evidence also linked five secondary mass graves along “Liplje Road” to the Petkovci Dam site. Autopsies were carried out in June 1998 on the remains; however, the bodies were largely fragmented, which is consistent with post-mortem tampering. The grave at the Petkovci Dam site contained the remains of at least 46 individuals, 15 of whom were identifiable as male. Because of the separation of the body parts, the remains were collected in 91 body bags. Some of the remains showed evidence of binding, as well as possible blindfolding. 

703.    Most of the bodies could not be reconstructed. According to the exhumation report from the site, the fact that 464 skull fragments and 211 shell casings were retrieved from the surface of the grave is consistent with a number of individuals being shot in the head. However, the forensic experts could not determine the cause of death for 81 of the body bags, as they contained incomplete or mixed skeletal remains. 

704.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP personnel transported at least 1,000 Bosnian Muslims from the detention sites in and around Bratunac to the school in Petkovci, and that on 14 and 15 July 1995, some of those men were shot
with automatic weapons by VRS and/or MUP members. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that between the evening of 14 July 1995 and the early morning on 15 July 1995, the remainder of the Bosnian Muslim men detained in the school were transported from the Petkovci School to the nearby Dam and were executed by VRS and/or MUP personnel with automatic weapons. The victims were then buried in mass graves near the Dam and later moved to
secondary graves. 
(d) Pilica School (14–15 July 1995)

705.    The parties agreed that on 14 and 15 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP personnel transported a number of Bosnian Muslim males from detention sites in Bratunac to Pilica School. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave or separated in Potočari. On or about 14 and 15 July 1995, VRS personnel shot and killed some of the Bosnian Muslim males who had arrived, or were being detained, at the school. 

706.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 14 and 15 July 1995, VRS
personnel shot and killed a number of Bosnian Muslim males detained at Pilica School. 
(e) Branjevo Military Farm (16 July 1995)

707.    The parties agreed that on 14 July 1995, Bosnian Muslim prisoners from Bratunac were bussed to a school in the village of Pilica and detained there until 16 July 1995. They were then taken out of the school and loaded onto buses with their hands tied behind their backs and driven to the Branjevo Military Farm. Drina Corps Military Police were engaged in guarding the Bosnian Muslim prisoners in the buses that took them to the execution site at the Branjevo Military Farm. There, groups of ten men at a time were lined up and shot. In total, approximately 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men were executed. On 17 July 1995, members of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company participated in digging mass graves using its equipment. 

708.    The evidence reflects that Lieutenant Colonel Vujadin Popović was involved in organising the allocation of fuel to transfer the Bosnian Muslim prisoners to the execution site at Branjevo
Farm. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that Popović’s request for fuel and its subsequent delivery was related to the operation of executing and burying the Bosnian Muslim prisoners at Branjevo Farm.

709.    Dražen Erdemović, a member of the VRS 10th Sabotage Detachment, testified about his participation in the mass execution, together with other members of his unit. His unit drove from Sarajevo to Zvornik, where they were ordered to follow a Lieutenant-Colonel (wearing a VRS uniform and rank insignia) and two policemen whom Erdemović assumed belonged to the Drina Corps. Several minutes after arriving at a farm near Pilica, which Erdemović later learned was Branjevo Military Farm, the Lieutenant-Colonel and the two policemen left and members of
the 10th Sabotage Detachment were told by Brano Gojković that buses with individuals from
Vlasenica would be arriving and that they would have to execute the detainees. 

710.    The first bus arrived at the farm between 10:00 and 11:00 hours on 16 July 1995, and was accompanied by two military policemen. The passengers consisted of civilian men between the ages of 15 and 65. All of them were blindfolded and had their hands bound behind their backs. Subsequently, between 15 and 20 buses arrived at the farm. Erdemović believed that all of the buses were full of passengers. The soldiers followed the same procedure with each bus. The civilians were taken in groups of ten from the bus to a field beyond the garage. There, they were lined up with their backs facing the soldiers and were shot. The military policemen stood at the door of the bus to prevent anyone from escaping. 

711.    In the course of the day, six to ten members of the Bratunac Brigade joined the 10th Sabotage Detachment to help execute men from Vlasenica. Erdemović estimates that the executions lasted until the afternoon of 16 July 1995 and that approximately 1,000 men were executed. 

712.    MP-294, a survivor of the executions at Branjevo Military Farm, testified about what occurred there on 16 July 1995. MP-294 was transferred from Pilica to Branjevo on a bus with approximately 50 other men. After watching the soldiers execute the first group of men, MP-294 was led to the execution site with a second group. They were lined up with their backs to the soldiers, and then ordered to lie down. He heard shots, but was not hit by a bullet; he remained lying down and witnessed the executions of six or seven more columns of men. After the executions finished, MP-294 observed between 1,000 and 1,500 dead bodies lying in the field at Branjevo Military Farm. 

713.    In its Final Trial Brief, the Defence argues that the Prosecution has failed to prove the number of persons allegedly killed at Branjevo Military Farm on 16 July 1995 because it did not present any evidence to corroborate MP-294’s testimony regarding the total number of bodies found at Branjevo Military Farm. 

714.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that MP-294’s evidence regarding the total number of Bosnian Muslim men killed at Branjevo Military Farm on 16 July 1995 was sufficiently corroborated by Erdemović’s evidence, as well as by evidence of which the Trial Chamber took judicial notice. Therefore, the Trial Chamber finds beyond a reasonable doubt that on 16 July 1995, over 1,000 Bosnian Muslim men previously detained in the Pilica School were executed by VRS members at the Branjevo Military Farm, and buried in a mass grave nearby.
(f) Pilica Cultural Centre (16 July 1995)

715.    The parties agreed that on 16 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP personnel, including members of the Bratunac Brigade, summarily executed approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim men with automatic weapons inside the Pilica Cultural Centre. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave or separated in Potočari. Dra`en Erdemović testified that following the executions at Branjevo Military Farm, he and other members of the Bratunac Brigade were asked by his superior officer to participate in additional executions at the Pilica Culutral Centre. Erdemović declined and was taken to a café in Pilica across the road from the cultural hall. From the cafe, he saw several people in civilian clothes lying on the ground beside the cultural hall; then he heard gun-fire from the direction of the cultural hall and the sound of exploding hand-grenades. After the noise stopped, members of the Bratunac Brigade joined him at the café. 

716.    At 22:10 hours on 16 July 1995, the Zvornik Brigade’s 1st Battalion, stationed at Branjevo Military Farm, requested a loader, an excavator and a dump truck to arrive in Pilica at 08:00 hours on 17 July 1995. On 17 July 1995, VRS personnel retrieved the bodies from the Pilica Cultural Centre and transferred them to Branjevo Military Farm, where they buried them in a mass grave. On that day, several conversations were intercepted involving Popović. In a conversation recorded at 16:22 hours, Popović tells an unknown interlocutor, whom he refers to as “boss”, that “everything’s OK, that job is done … everything’s been brought to an end, no problems … ”. The Trial Chamber is satisfied that the “job” which Popović referred to in this intercept was the killing and burying of Bosnian Muslim males in the Zvornik area.

717.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 16 July 1995, approximately 500 men were summarily executed inside the Pilica Cultural Centre by VRS and/or MUP forces using automatic weapons. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the bodies of the victims were then transported to Branjevo Military Farm, where they were buried in a mass grave. 
(g) Kozluk (16 July 1995)

718.    The parties agreed that on 15 or 16 July 1995, VRS and/or MUP forces transported approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim men to an isolated place near Kozluk, a rubbish dump for a bottling factory, where they were summarily executed with automatic weapons. These Bosnian Muslim men had been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave or separated in Potočari. On 16 July 1995, VRS soldiers buried the victims of these executions in a mass grave nearby. 

719.    On 16 July 1995, Dragan Jokić sent members of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company, Miloš Mitrović and Nikola Ricanović, as well as an excavator, to report to the commander of the Zvornik Brigade Engineering Company’s fortification platoon, Damjan Lazarević. Upon their arrival, Lazarević ordered Mitrović to cover bodies placed in already-dug graves with dirt. Mitrović worked in Kozluk until it was clear that his machine could not finish the task because it was only operating at 30% capacity and was, in fact, not designed for that type of work. 

720.    Forensic investigation and exhumation of bodies at the Kozluk site was conducted in 1999. The investigation covered four locations (KK1-KK4). As a result of the exhumation, 292 bodies and 233 body parts were recovered, totaling a minimum of 340 individuals based on anthropological calculations. Many of the victims were found with blindfolds and ligatures around their hands, and most of the bodies showed evidence of gunshot injury. 

721.    Forensic expert Richard Wright identified a secondary grave at Čančići Road 3, derived from a primary grave in Kozluk. The bodies of at least 160 individuals were exhumed from the Čančići Road 3 grave. 

722.    Wright concluded that between 451 and 660 executions took place at Kozluk site. Wright also detailed his findings with respect to shell casings, ligatures, blindfolds and identifying papers. The presence of certain species of flowers and plants is consistent with the evidence that the executions occurred in the middle of July. 

723.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that on 15 or 16 July 1995, approximately 500 Bosnian Muslim males were transported to an isolated place near Kozluk, and were summarily executed by VRS and/or MUP forces with automatic weapons. The Trial Chamber further finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the remains were subsequently buried in a mass grave
near the execution site, and were later moved to a secondary mass grave along Čančići Road. 
(h) Nezuk (19 July 1995)

724.    The parties agreed that on 19 July 1995, VRS personnel under the command of the Zvornik Brigade captured 11 Bosnian Muslim men from the column and summarily executed them with automatic weapons; ten of the 11 men were killed near Nezuk. 

725.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that VRS personnel killed 11 Bosnian Muslim men near Nezluk on 19 July 1995. 
(i) 18 July–1 November 1995

726.    Paragraph 5.2 of Schedule D of the Indictment alleges that “from 18 July through about 1 November, additional members of the Bosnian Muslim column were captured or killed in the Bratunac Brigade zone by the VRS and MUP forces”. In its Final Trial Brief, the Prosecution submits that the killings alleged in paragraph 5.2 of the Indictment were confirmed by Momir Nikolić. However, the Trial Chamber finds that the evidence provided by Nikolić is not sufficiently detailed for an allegation that covers such an extensive period. Therefore, without the benefit of additional corroborative evidence, the Trial Chamber finds that insufficient evidence was presented to establish beyond a reasonable doubt that between 18 July and 1 November 1995, members of the Bosnian Muslim column were captured or killed in the Bratunac Brigade zone by VRS and MUP forces.
11. Identity of the Principal Perpetrators

727.    The Trial Chamber finds that key VRS officers involved in the commission, planning, ordering, instigating, or aiding and abetting of the crimes in Vlasenica included: Ratko Mladić, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko Pandurević, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Momir Nikolić and Dragan Jokić. The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that the VRS and/or MUP forces, under the effective control of the aforementioned key officers, committed the charged crimes.
12. MUP Resubordination to the VRS

728.    The Trial Chamber received evidence that RS law provided for the resubordination of the
RS MUP to the VRS in times of war. This law formed the basis of Richard Butler’s conclusion that the MUP was under the command of the VRS during the Vlasenica events. This conclusion is also corroborated by Momir Nikolić who testified that “all forces that were engaged in the Vlasenica operation … were commanded and controlled by the Chief of Staff General Krstić and the commander of the Drina Corps”. Based on the evidence before it, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that, in the area of Vlasenica, the RS MUP operated under the command of the VRS.
13. Legal Findings

729.    The Indictment charges the Accused with murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13).
(a) General Requirements under Article 3

730.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that an armed conflict took place in Eastern Bosnia between the ABiH and the VRS during the Indictment period. 

731.    The alleged victims of the crimes in this case were Bosnian Muslims captured by VRS and/or MUP forces in the course, or aftermath, of combat activity. Based on the evidence set out above regarding the capture, detention and killing of Bosnian Muslims, the Trial Chamber finds that the underlying crimes alleged in the Indictment were closely related to the armed conflict.

732.    The alleged victims of the crimes were persons taking no active part in hostilities at the time the relevant crimes were committed. Based on the evidence set out above regarding the capture, detention and killing of Bosnian Muslims, the Trial Chamber finds that this additional requirement under Common Article 3 is fulfilled.

733.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the general requirements of Article 3 have been met.
(b) General Requirements under Article 5

734.    The Trial Chamber finds that there was a widespread or systematic attack directed against the Bosnian Muslim civilian population in the area of Vlasenica. As the evidence shows, the attack was of a large-scale, affecting approximately 35,000 people who lived in the area, and was organised in nature. 

735.    The attack was directed against United Nations enclaves, established specifically to protect civilians, and thus, there can be no doubt that the population of these enclaves was predominantly civilian. The Trial Chamber finds, therefore, that the attack was directed against a civilian population within the meaning of Article 5 of the Statute.

736.    The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the crimes committed by the VRS and/or MUP were part of that attack, and that the perpetrators knew of the attack and that their acts formed part of it.

737.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the general requirements of Article 5 have been met.
(c) Murder

738.    As the Trial Chamber previously noted, the elements of murder are the same under both Articles 3 and Article 5: the death of the victim, the causation of the death of the victim by the accused and the mens rea of the perpetrator. 

739.    Based on the entire evidence in this case, the Trial Chamber has already found that VRS and/or MUP personnel perpetrated the killings specifically enumerated in Schedule D of the Indictment, except for scheduled incidents 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 4.3 and 5.2. The Trial Chamber finds that the victims of these killings were Bosnian Muslim men who had surrendered or been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave or had been separated at Potočari. Hence, the victims of these killings did not take an active part in the hostilities at the time they were killed and this was apparent to those involved. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the killings were intentional.

740.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the aforementioned killings constitute murder, both as a crime against humanity and a violation of the laws or customs of war. Accordingly, the Trial Chamber finds that the crime of murder under Counts 9 and 10 of the Indictment has been established for the scheduled incidents described in Schedule D, except for incidents 3.1, 3.2, 4.2, 4.3 and 5.2. The individual criminal responsibility of the Accused for these crimes is discussed in sections VII-VIII of the Judgement.
(d) Inhumane Acts (Article 5(i))

741.    Count 11 of the Indictment charges the Accused with inhumane acts, as crimes against humanity under Article 5(i) of the Statute, including inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer. 
(i) Inflicting Serious Injuries and Wounding

742.    As the Trial Chamber previously noted, serious physical and mental injury or wounding are considered “inhumane acts” under Article 5(i) of the Statute. As shown by the factual findings detailed above, the Bosnian Muslims detained in Potočari and elsewhere were subjected to horrific and inhumane conditions, as well as physical assaults. These combined circumstances constituted a serious attack on their human dignity and inflicted on them serious mental and physical suffering and injury. Based on the factual findings detailed above, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Bosnian Muslims in the area of Vlasenica suffered serious bodily or mental harm while in detention or in other locations, and that VRS and/or MUP personnel intentionally inflicted this suffering.
(ii) Forcible Transfer

743.    The parties agreed that from July 1995 onwards, the Bosnian Muslim civilians who were bussed out of Potočari were not making a free choice to leave the area of the enclave; rather, they were forcibly transferred from the enclave by the VRS. This is also confirmed by the evidence analysed above. The evidence is also clear that the perpetrators intended to forcibly transfer the Bosnian Muslim civilians from Potočari.

744.    The Trial Chamber finds beyond reasonable doubt that the elements of the crime of forcible transfer with regard to the Bosnian Muslim civilians who were transported out of Potočari have been met and that the crime of forcible transfer was committed against them.

745.    The Trial Chamber finds that these acts of forcible transfer are sufficiently serious to amount to “other inhumane acts” under Article 5(i) of the Statute.

746.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of inhumane acts, including inflicting serious injuries, wounding and forcible transfer, as alleged in Count 11 of the Indictment, has been established.
(e) Persecutions on Political, Racial or Religious Grounds

747.    Count 12 of the Indictment charges the Accused with persecutions on political, racial and religious grounds, a crime against humanity in violation of Article 5(h) of the Statute, through the underlying acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer. The underlying acts of murder and forcible transfer have also been charged as separate crimes, and the elements have been dealt with separately above. It is, however, still required to determine whether they meet the requisite criteria for the crime of persecutions.
(i) Underlying Acts
a. Murder

748.    The Trial Chamber recalls that it found that between 12 July 1995 and approximately 19
July 1995, thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim males were killed by VRS and/or MUP forces in several different locations in and around Vlasenica, Bratunac, and Zvornik. Murder is enumerated in Article 5 of the Statute and by definition considered to be serious enough to amount to persecutions.

749.    As to the specific intent of the crime of persecutions, the Trial Chamber has considered the massive scale of the murder operation aimed at only one ethnic group, the Bosnian Muslims and the systematic manner in which it was carried out. As such, the Trial Chamber finds that these killings were committed against the Bosnian Muslims with a discriminatory intent on political, racial or religious grounds.
b. Cruel and Inhumane Treatment

750.    The Trial Chamber finds that, as described in detail above, the Bosnian Muslims detained in Potočari and elsewhere suffered serious bodily or mental harm caused by horrific and inhumane conditions, as well as physical assaults. The Trial Chamber further finds that this cruel and inhumane treatment is of equal gravity to the crimes listed in Article 5 and constitutes a blatant denial of fundamental rights that had a severe impact on the victims. The Trial Chamber therefore concludes that it amounts to an underlying act of persecutions.

751.    As to specific intent, the Trial Chamber finds that Bosnian Muslim victims were subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment solely on the basis that they were Bosnian Muslims. The Trial Chamber concludes that the circumstances surrounding the infliction of the cruel and inhumane treatment demonstrate that it was carried out with the intention to discriminate against the Bosnian Muslims on political, racial or religious grounds.
c. Forcible Transfer

752.    The Trial Chamber recalls that it found that the crime of forcible transfer was committed by the VRS against thousands of Bosnian Muslim civilians who were transported out of Potočari in July 1995. 

753.    As to specific intent, considering the issuance of Directive 7 and the other circumstances surrounding the transfer of the Bosnian Muslim civilians, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the forcible transfer was carried out with the intent to discriminate against Bosnian Muslims on political, racial or religious grounds.
(ii) Conclusion

754.    As noted above, the acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer were committed against the Bosnian Muslims with a discriminatory intent. The Trial Chamber therefore concludes beyond a reasonable doubt that the underlying acts of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer constitute persecutions as defined in Article 5 of the Statute. These underlying acts of persecution were committed in the context of a widespread and systematic attack and thus constitute crimes against humanity. Accordingly, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crimes of murder, cruel and inhumane treatment and forcible transfer as underlying acts of persecution, as alleged in Count 12 of the Indictment, have been established.
(f) Extermination

755.    Count 13 of the Indictment charges the Accused with extermination, a crime against humanity, punishable under Article 5(b) of the Statute. 

756.    The Trial Chamber has found that VRS and/or MUP forces killed thousands of Bosnian Muslim able-bodied males in and around Vlasenica, Bratunac and Zvornik during the period of the Indictment. Furthermore, the parties agreed that over the course of the seven-day period between
12 July 1995 and approximately 19 July 1995, VRS and MUP forces participated in a planned and organised mass execution and burial of thousands of captured Bosnian Muslim men from the Vlasenica enclave. 

757.    The Trial Chamber therefore finds beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of extermination, as alleged in Count 13 of the Indictment, was committed against the Bosnian Muslim men who had been separated at Potočari or had surrendered or been captured from the column of men retreating from the Vlasenica enclave. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the VRS and/or MUP had the intent to kill on a massive scale.

758.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that the crime of extermination, as alleged in Count 13 of the Indictment, has been established.

759.    The Trial Chamber found that key VRS officers involved in the commission, planning, ordering, instigating, or aiding and abetting of the crimes in Vlasenica included: Ratko Mladić, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Ljubiša Beara, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Vinko Pandurević, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Momir Nikolić and Dragan
Jokić. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that the conduct of VRS and/or MUP forces, under the effective control of the these key officers, constituted murder as a violation of the laws or customs of war (Count 10) and murder, inhumane acts, persecutions and exterminations as crimes against humanity (Counts 9, 11, 12 and 13). The Trial Chamber found that these key officers and their subordinates committed the charged crimes.

760.    The issue of whether Vuković bears responsibility for these crimes will be addressed separately.
VI. 	INDIVIDUAL CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
A. Personnel Assistance - 30th and 40th Personnel Centres
1. Events Leading up to the Formation of the Personnel Centres

761.    When the JNA withdrew from Croatia and BiH, a number of JNA military personnel remained behind to serve in the SVK and VRS. After the VJ was formed, additional personnel were dispatched by the VJ to the VRS and SVK. With respect to the military personnel who remained in BiH, or were sent there by the VJ, the Federal Secretariat of National Defence decided on 6 May 1992 that they would “retain all rights as other members of the VJ ”. 

762.    Notwithstanding this order, the status and rights of these military personnel remained unregulated. In addition, there was no legal basis specifically regulating the transfer of VJ military personnel to the VRS and SVK. VJ members were reassigned to these armies pursuant to Article 271 of the Law on Service in the Armed Forces, which generally provided for the temporary
assignment to other military units or institutions within the JNA. In March 1993, Mladić sent a letter to Panić, then serving as Chief of VJ General Staff, which illustrates the shortcomings of this arrangement. Mladić complained that military personnel were leaving the VRS to return to the VJ without authorisation from the VRS Main Staff, stating that their deployment to the VRS from the VJ was only temporary. In Mladić’s words:





The Main Staff of the VRS , since its establishment, believed that … the SVK, VRS and VJ were only separate elements of the combat disposition of a single army. We consider this assumption to be the legal basis for the obligatory engagement of members of the VJ regardless of their place of origin in the units of the VRS and its combat operations, and the engagement of
those whose roots are in the RS a moral and patriotic act and an obligation. 





Mladić therefore asked Panić to adopt “an enactment making it obligatory for all active military personnel who come from the former Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the VRS at the request of the Main Staff of the VRS ”. He also proposed that “ a ll those who refuse to comply with this request must be removed from the VJ in an appropriate procedure … ”. He also lamented that military personnel from the former JNA or VJ already serving in the VRS, were penalised in terms of rights and benefits compared to VJ personnel that remained in the FRY and asked that instead they be guaranteed equal treatment. There is no evidence as to whether Panić took any steps in response to Mladić’s letter.

763.    After replacing Panić as Chief of VJ General Staff, Vuković took official steps to answer Mladić’s request. In late September or early October 1993, Vuković sent a proposed order to Lilić regarding the regulation of the status and dispatch of military personnel to the VRS and SVK. The statement of reasons for this proposal expressly stated that since the withdrawal of the JNA from the territories of the Former Yugoslavia, three issues remained open: i) the legal status and rights of JNA military personnel who remained in the VRS and SVK; ii) the fact that there was no legal basis to temporarily dispatch VJ military personnel to the VRS and SVK; and iii) the enjoyment of rights (salaries, housing, promotions, personal record in the VJ, etc.) of all of the above personnel in the VJ and FRY. The statements of reasons also indicated that until then, the Chief of the VJ General Staff dealt with these issues based on temporary “standpoints”, “without any legal basis and in a semi legal manner”. The proposal also included termination of service as a sanction in case of refusal to comply with the transfer order. The proposed order – with a minor revision and a more detailed statement of reasons – was inserted in the agenda for discussion at the SDC session of 11 October 1993. 

764.    In the new statement of reasons, Vuković reiterated that there was no “solid legal framework” for sending VJ personnel outside of the FRY without their consent. As a consequence, this could expose the VJ to potential litigation and exposure to the “local and foreign public”. In Vuković’s view, the proposed order therefore represented “the only possible solution … given the current circumstances, the position of the FRY and VJ and fulfilment of the request of the Main Staffs of the VRS and SVK ”. He then described the mechanism through which VJ personnel would serve in the VRS and SVK:





The relevant officer in the VJ would make all these persons available and send them to a special organ of the VJ General Staff (Personnel Administration) based in Belgrade. Further procedure to organise and implement the departure of these persons and resolve their status in service while they are outside of the VJ will be taken over by the authorised organs of the Main Staff of the VRS or SVK . All the rights of these active servicemen and civilians would be fully protected and
enjoyed in the same manner and scope as for other professionals in the VJ. 





The most contentious issue was the termination of service of those military personnel who refused redeployment to the VRS and SVK. As there was no direct legal basis for the said termination, Vuković proposed alternative means to achieve it, including early retirement, termination due to special needs of service and interests of the VJ or by order of a military disciplinary court for refusal to carry out an order. 

765.    During the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Vuković presented his proposed order to Zoran Lilić, Slobodan Milošević and Momir Bulatović:





These are personnel issues related to officers in the VRS and SVK . We have 3,612 people there whose status has not been regulated under the new law. In order to have a foothold, we have paved the way for the President of the state, in his capacity as Supreme Commander, to issue an order regulating their status and that of officers here. And in order to avoid having anyone criticise us, we have devised a temporary formation in the VJ . We appoint them here; they are not actually here but are performing their duties over where they are stationed. … We must create a stronghold so that the General Staff can work on these issues to a certain extent within the spirit of the law, even though this is not entirely in conformity with the law. But we cannot see a better
solution. 





766.    Vuković then proceeded to explain the issue of ordering VJ officers to perform their duties in the VRS and SVK in order to meet these armies’ pressing requests for military personnel. According to Vuković, VJ soldiers who refused such a transfer order should be considered deserters. Vuković also stated that he had found the appropriate solutions to deal with those who refused to respond to the call, including early retirement:





For instance, if someone doesn’t want to go and has over 30 years of pensionable employment, we can give him early retirement so that we’re not accepting this. We’ll tell him that he is not performing his duties in a satisfactory manner and other things, but we won’t write that he did not want to go there. 





767.    Momir Bulatović, though in favour of obligatory deployment, expressed concern that such a coercive method would become public and suggested that the order be revised in that regard. To meet this concern, Vuković amended the order and presented the new version at the following SDC session held on 10 November. Although the new version of the draft order did not contain any reference to the termination of service of VJ members who refused to transfer to the VRS or SVK, it suggested that such refusal would have an adverse impact on the future promotion of those soldiers within the VJ. Vuković eventually agreed to delete that part of the draft, accepting Milošević’s remark that the addition was superfluous, as the power to refuse promotion was already within Vuković’s purview. 

768.    The SDC members agreed that the order should be kept secret and that no mention should be made of the fact that “failure to go to the VRS and SVK meant termination of service in the VJ ”. 
2. Legal Documents Establishing the Personnel Centres

769.    The final version of the order was eventually signed by Lilić on 10 November 1993 and, in fact, contained no reference to coercive or punitive measures for those VJ military personnel who refused to be transferred. 

770.    The order, due to its importance for the present case, deserves to be quoted in its entirety:
- 
The General Staff of the VJ shall organise and keep a special record of the active-duty servicemen, contract servicemen and civilian employees of the former JNA … who remained in the territory of the RS and RSK , and the professional servicemen and civilians employed in the VJ who were born in the former SFRY … republics of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina and were admitted to military schools or joined the JNA from these republics.The individuals mentioned in the previous paragraph shall be dispatched, assigned, transferred and appointed to appropriate posts by the competent officer in the VJ , depending on the needs of service and the individual’s abilities, as per establishment of personnel centres that will be set up by the Chief of the General Staff of the VJ .- 
The General Staff of the VJ is under obligation to enable all the other professional servicemen of the VJ to be dispatched, assigned or transferred to the appropriate personnel centre at their request and with the approval of the head of the personnel centre, depending on the needs of service.- 
While performing their duties following the order on dispatch, assignment, transfer and appointment to a post at a personnel centre, individuals from items 1 and 2 of this Order shall carry out their professional duties in accordance with the special work plan of the personnel centre.Throughout this period, these individuals shall retain all the rights pertaining to their rank and qualification and retain the salary they had in the post they occupied before the current assignment or they shall receive the salary envisaged for the new post, whichever is more favourable for the individual.- 
To ensure that the special personnel centres operate as planned, the Chief of the General Staff of the VJ shall determine: the organisation and establishment of special personnel centres; the manner of operation and a plan of activities, the number and makeup of professional servicemen and civilians who are dispatched, assigned and transferred to personnel centres; the manner procedure and period of engaging individuals (including professional officers whose appointment falls within the competence of the FRY President) according to this plan of activities, and the manner of and procedure for resolving situations that arise during service and the protection of rights arising from the service for individuals and members of their families.The Chief of the General Staff may authorise other officers of the VJ to carry out some assignments from this Order.- 
For the implementation of all the assignments from this Order that fall within the competence of the FRY MOD , ensure full coordination and cooperation between the General Staff of the VJ and this Ministry. 

771.    Subsequently on 12 November 1993, Vuković issued an order executing Lilić’s order and delegating that the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration draft instructions on the functioning of the personnel centres. Vuković’s order further delegated that the VJ General Staff Chief of the Personnel Administration issue orders on the dispatch, deployment, relocation and appointment of professional soldiers up to the rank of colonel and civilians. As for professional soldiers with the rank of general, as well as military judges and prosecutors, the Chief of the Personnel
Administration had to submit his proposals to Vuković. 

772.    On 15 November 1993, the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres (“PCs”) were formally established. According to Starčević, the establishment of the 30th and 40th PCs was in accordance with Vuković’s authority as Chief of the General Staff to establish the organisation of the army and its units. The 30th PC was in charge of former JNA or VJ officers deployed to the VRS and the 40th PC managed the officers sent to the SVK. They were also known as Military Post 3001 and Military Post 4001, respectively, and were directly subordinated to the Head of the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration. The 30th and 40th PCs were located in the buildings of the VJ General Staff in Belgrade, on the premises of the Personnel Administration. 

773.    On 8 December 1993, the VJ General Staff Instructions on the Functioning and Programme of Activities of Special PCs (“Instructions”) signed by Vuković came into force. According to the Instructions, the PCs had to form and manage “precise records of status and any changes in the personal profile of professional soldiers and civilian personnel” in line with Lilić’s order of 10 November 1993. In addition, the PCs were also required to keep record of the personnel who refused to be transferred to the VRS and SVK. 

774.    All of the records kept by the PCs, including the issues related to status, promotion or the exercise of the other service rights of members of the PCs, were regulated in line with the law applicable to the VJ. 

775.    The Instructions also regulated the “dispatch and transfer” of VJ professional soldiers and civilian personnel to the 30th and 40th PCs, establishing that while transferred, these servicemen would retain the position they held prior to their dispatch to the PCs. The Instructions equally provided that upon receipt of the transfer order, these personnel were to hand over duties and report “to the relevant PC officer … , that is to say to report to any other destination stipulated in the call-up of the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration”. 

776.    Moreover, the Instructions clearly stated that all of the decisions or orders regulating the service of these personnel should only be issued orally to the individuals to whom they referred. They prohibited the personnel and command organs, as well as officers, to provide copies, photocopies or extracts from the decisions or orders to the personnel to whom they referred. Finally, the Instructions provided for the redeployment of professional soldiers and civilian personnel from the PCs to the VJ. 

777.    The Trial Chamber finds that Vuković had a decisive role in the creation of the PCs. The evidence set out above shows that he conceived and subsequently carefully implemented the idea to create such centres to: (i) regularise the status of all former JNA and VJ military personnel who remained in BiH and Croatia and (ii) to legalise, as far as possible, the deployment of VJ military personnel to the VRS and SVK. In doing so, Vuković intended to meet the requests for military personnel by the VRS and SVK Main Staffs. The statement of reasons accompanying the proposed order on the creation of the PCs, as well as the discussions held during the SDC sessions of
11 October and 10 November 1993, conclusively establish that Vuković designed the formation of the PCs. His role in this process was confirmed by Vuković himself, who at the SDC session of 30 August 1995 reminded the SDC members that he was the one who “advocated” for the idea of sending all those military personnel who originated from Croatia and the BiH to serve in the SVK and VRS. 
3. The Role of the 30th and the 40th PCs and their Secrecy

778.    According to the Prosecution, the structure and purpose of the PCs were an “elaborate deception”. In the Prosecution’s theory, Vuković created the PCs with the excuse of keeping a record of the members of the former JNA or VJ born in Croatia and Bosnia who joined the SVK or VRS, while his real purpose was to find a legal cover to dispatch VJ soldiers to participate in the war in Bosnia and Croatia. According to the Prosecution, it was vital to maintain secrecy over the true role of the PCs in order to conceal the VJ’s involvement in those conflicts from the local and international community. 

779.    The Defence instead contends that the PCs were “administrative bodies” established for the purpose of registering certain professional officers of the VRS and SVK and that their mandate was defined by an order of the President of the FRY, Lilić. As regards the secrecy surrounding the PCs, the Defence states it is normal for matters concerning the army and state security to be treated with the “highest level of secrecy” in order to safeguard state interests. 

780.    As detailed in the aforesaid Instructions and as stated by numerous witnesses, the PCs’ functions included the regulation of paperwork and maintenance of records of VJ personnel serving in the VRS and SVK. These functions allowed their members to enjoy all of the rights and entitlements of VJ officers and receive salaries commensurate to their ranks. As will be described in greater detail in the following paragraphs, through the PCs, members could, inter alia, apply for VJ pension plans, compensation for service in difficult conditions, housing benefits and education grants. 

781.    However, the Trial Chamber also received evidence showing that the main purpose of the PCs was to effectively enable the transfer and assignment of VJ officers to the SVK and VRS and, if necessary, their subsequent redeployment to the VJ. When VJ officers were formally transferred to either the 30th or 40th PCs in Belgrade, they were, in fact, relocated to positions within the VRS and SVK respectively. Vuković himself explained that “ i n our orders, for instance, we write to them: the commander of such and such a unit shall be deployed in a training corps which is supposed to be here, but in fact he is going over there”. Similarly, at the SDC session held on 10 November 1993, Vuković openly stated:





An officer is appointed there to the PC as per the formation elements and the like, like in our case but he in fact works in RS . We also have the PC which is for the RSK . They have all the rights as if they were in the VJ here, with regard to everything, except that they are physically
absent, they’re on the front. 





782.    As a measure to maintain the secrecy of the VJ involvement in the transfer of VJ officers to the VRS and SVK from the local and international public, the deployment orders delivered to these officers would refer to deployment to the PCs in Belgrade, but would not mention the RS or the RSK. 

783.    A year later, during the SDC session held on 21 July 1994, Lilić commented: “ W e have made very good decisions with regard to transferring officers born in RS and RSK and the 30th and 40th staff centre [sic] has been formed for that purpose. This has functioned very well in practice so far”. At the same session, Vuković reported:





As for the VRS and SVK … , about 6,800 officers there are taking care of the system, people and organisation, and fighting successfully. To date, at their request, we have sent a total of 3,795 more on permanent transfer and 187 on rotational basis. 





784.    Several witnesses testified about covert transfers to the VRS and SVK through the PCs. For instance, when commenting on Dragomir Milošević’s appointment to the 30th PC, Stamenko Nikolić stated that he “was not appointed to the personnel centre. He was sent or seconded to the VRS through the 30th PC, and that is something that the personnel centre does, and it is part of its programme”. He also stated that reference to the PCs instead of the VRS or SVK was necessary, as that information needed to be secret. 

785.    The Trial Chamber further notes that Exhibit P1523 also illustrates this covert transfer of VJ officers through the PCs. Exhibit P1523 is an order of the Chief of the Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff dated 15 February 1994 which appoints Bogdan Sladojević and Milan
Čeleketić to the 11th and 18th Corps, respectively, of the 40th PC. On its face, the order seems to
transfer the two officers to Belgrade-based garrisons, respectively numbered 683 and 669. Stamenko Nikolić explained that neither the 11th nor the 18th Corps ever existed in the VJ. Instead, both Corps were part of the SVK and the two garrison numbers mentioned in the order refer, in fact, to the 11th and 18th Corps command in the SVK and not to Belgrade garrisons. In addition, Nikolić commented on the date “101193” (10 November 1993) printed in relation to each officer’s appointment and explained that the date was a code for Lilić’s order of 10 November 1993 regarding the formation of the PCs. The witness added that Sladojević had been transferred to the SVK before 15 February 1994 and that, in his view, the Chief of Personnel Administration
issued the order to bring previous transfer orders in line with Lilić’s order of 10 November 1993. 

786.    The fact that the PCs were not purely administrative bodies is equally evidenced by Lilić’s order of February 1994 that the VJ supply the 30th and 40th PCs with weapons and military equipment. To this end, the order further authorised the Chief of VJ General Staff to reconcile the needs of the PCs with the means of the VJ and to regulate the supply of weapons and military
equipment to the PCs. 

787.    In conclusion, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the PCs’ main function was to regulate the status of all those former JNA/VJ officers who remained to serve in the SVK and VRS after the withdrawal of the JNA and to allow the VJ to secretly transfer VJ military personnel to the VRS and SVK, ensuring that they all continued to enjoy and exercise their rights in the VJ and FRY while serving in those armies. To this end, the PCs accessory function was to keep record of all former JNA and VJ personnel serving in the VRS and SVK. The Trial Chamber is equally satisfied that all the SDC members, as well as Vuković, intended to keep this function and the VJ involvement in the conflicts secret in order to avoid criticism or risking further sanctions from the international community. As described above, under the cover of a formal appointment to the PCs, VJ personnel were transferred directly to the VRS and SVK. The need and intention to keep this function secret was clearly expressed at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 while discussing the order on the establishment of the PCs. Vuković admitted that the establishment of the PCs had been devised in order to “avoid having anyone criticise us” for the number of former JNA and VJ personnel serving in the VRS and SVK. Momir Bulatović instead expressed his concern that, should the document fall into anybody’s hands, the FRY would face sanctions “for ten years”. Slobodan Milošević too stressed that only a single copy of the proposal should stay with Vuković. The need to ensure secrecy was stressed again at the following session of 10 November 1993, when the order was finalised and eventually signed. Bulatović stated that the order should remain confidential “because this is a very sensitive issue” to which Slobodan Milošević responded “ t here is only one copy and General Momo has it”. 
4. Appointment and Transfers to the VRS and SVK through the Personnel Centres

788.    The Law on the VJ came into force in October 1993 and based on Article 152, Vuković and the commanding officers of the units or institutions designated by him had the authority to “appoint and transfer professional non-commissioned and commissioned officers up to and including the rank of colonel and issue decisions on their service”. On 5 May 1994, Vuković authorised the Chief of the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration to:





A ppoint professional non-commissioned officers and professional officers up to the rank of
Colonel according to the peacetime establishment and decide on their dismissal from duty;
transfer and assign professional non-commissioned officers and professional officers up to the rank of Lieutenant-Colonel if those individuals are being transferred or assigned to the military
unit or military institution directly subordinate to the General Staff or the General Staff
Organisation unit. 





789.    These provisions, together with Vuković’s order of 12 November 1993, formed the basis of the orders of appointment and/or transfer of VJ officers to the VRS and SVK after the establishment of the PCs. These orders were issued by the Chief of the Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff, to whom Vuković had delegated such authority, or by Vuković himself, and transferred and/or appointed VJ officers to positions within the 30th or 40th PCs. As explained above, these officers were in fact taking up positions in the VRS and SVK. A number of these orders were issued to harmonise the status and position of military personnel who remained or were deployed to the VRS and SVK before the establishment of the PCs. 

790.    The appointment and/or transfer orders were issued to meet pressing requests from the VRS and SVK to the VJ for personnel assistance. The evidence shows that the VRS Main Staff requested military personnel in general and occasionally requested specifically identified officers. For example, in April 1995, Mladić requested Vuković to send two VJ officers, Colonel Rade Katić and Lieutenant Colonel Radoslav Janković, to the VRS; in May 1995, Milovanović requested Lieutenant Colonel Svetozar Kosorić and Lieutenant Colonel Branko Karlica specifically. The evidence shows that Janković and Kosorić were indeed transferred to the VRS and were later involved in the attacks against Vlasenica of July 1995. 

791.    Similarly, in addition to general requests, the SVK also made specific requests to the VJ, including to Vuković personally, for specifically named officers. By way of example, in May 1994, Čeleketić requested the VJ General Staff to send 60 named officers. On 21 July 1994, Martić and Čeleketić requested 25 combat aviation pilots and 15 helicopter pilots. On 6 October 1995, Čeleketić requested six named VJ officers for the SVK 1st Light Infantry Brigade. On 8 October 1995, Lončar sent a request to Vuković personally for named VJ officers for the 11th Corps. 

792.    According to MP-80, about ten percent of the SVK officers had their status regulated through the 40th PC. Rade Rašeta, a JNA and VJ career officer serving in the SVK as a member of the 40th PC, stated that all members of the SVK Main Staff collegium, which was made up of inter alia the Chief of the Main Staff, Assistant for Logistics and Assistant for Morale, were officers assigned to the 40th PC. 

793.    As for the number of officers transferred to the VRS and SVK, the record of the SDC session of 11 October 1993 shows that at the time there were 3,612 VJ officers in the VRS and SVK. A report drafted in 2001 states that at the time of its establishment in 1993, the 30th PC was comprised of 4,183 men (2,461 professional servicemen and 1,722 civilians). On 10 November 1993, there were 2,477 VJ officers in the VRS, with an additional 205 officers expected to join a few days later. In May 1994, the 30th PC counted 4,281 men (including civilian personnel); in June 1994, it counted 4,173 men (military and civilian personnel); in September 1994 - 4,614 men (including civilian personnel); whereas in 1995 - 4,346 men (including civilian personnel). By September 1996, the 30th PC counted 3,363 professional soldiers and 1,730 civilian personnel for a total of 5,093 men. 

794.    As for the 40th PC, the evidence shows that on 10 November 1993, there were 1,192 VJ officers in the SVK, with another 561 expected to be dispatched by 16 November 1993. In June 1994, the 40th PC counted 1,474 men (military and civilian personnel); and in 1995, 930 military personnel (excluding civilian personnel). 

795.    VJ officers who served in the VRS through the 30th PC included key personnel such as: Ratko Mladić, Manojlo Milovanović, Đorđe Đukić, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Zdravko Tolimir, Milenko Živanović, Radislav Krstić, Vinko Pandurević, Vujadin Popović, Ljubiša Beara, Vidoje Blagojević, Dragan Jokić, Dragan Obrenović, Drago Nikolić, Svetozar Andrić, Stanislav Galić, Dragomir Milošević and Čedo Sladoje. In addition, the 30th PC regulated the status of Bogdan Subotić, and Dušan Kovačević, RS Minister of Defence from January 1993 until August 1994. 

796.    Similarly, key personnel who served in the SVK through the 40th PC included Mile
Novaković, Milan Čeleketić, Borislav Đukić and Dušan Lončar. 
5. Appointment to SVK and VRS Positions and Temporary Transfers

797.    The evidence shows that VJ officers were transferred and/or appointed to the 30th or 40th PCs by the VJ, whereas the VRS and SVK appointed these officers to specific posts within these armies. While accepting this as the general rule, the Prosecution argues that on occasion, the VJ would also appoint PC members to specific posts within the VRS. The prosecution relies on two orders of appointment, dated 12 August and 6 October 1995, regarding, inter alia, Vujadin Popović
and Dragan Obrenović. The Prosecution points out that in these cases, the order of transfer and appointment of VJ military personnel to the VRS through the PCs included internal appointments to different units within those armies - namely to the positions of Corps Chief of Security Department, Security and Intelligence Affairs and Infantry Brigade Chief of Staff, respectively. 

798.    The Defence disputes the proposition that the VJ could decide on appointments within the
VRS and SVK and submits that such decisions were independently made by these armies. 

799.    The Trial Chamber notes that both Popović and Obrenović held the positions of Corps Chief of Security Department, Security and Intelligence Affairs and Infantry Brigade Chief of Staff, respectively, before the VJ orders of appointment cited by the Prosecution were issued. The order of 12 August 1995 on Popović’s appointment, states that the appointment was effective as of 1
February 1995, “when he assumed duty”. This is reflected in his VJ personnel file. Similarly, the appointment order of 6 October 1995 relating to Obrenović states that his appointment to Chief of Staff of the Infantry Brigade was effective as of 1 August 1995, “when changes were effected in the unit establishment”. In addition, Obrenović was already “transferred and appointed” to the same position by VJ order of 9 February 1994, effective as of 10 November 1993. As discussed above, these orders of February 1994, were issued to harmonise the status of VJ personnel already serving in the VRS or SVK with Lilić’s order establishing the PCs. The evidence therefore shows that contrary to the Prosecution position, Popović and Obrenović were not appointed to those specific positions within the VRS by VJ order. The Trial Chamber therefore finds that while the VJ appointed VJ personnel to the 30th and 40th PCs, the appointment to specific posts within the VRS and SVK was done by those armies.

800.    The Trial Chamber was also presented with evidence of instances in which VJ soldiers were appointed to the VRS or SVK on a temporary basis through the PCs. These appointments were made pursuant to Article 58 of the Law of the VJ, which notably states:





If duty so requires, a professional soldier may be temporarily assigned to another unit or institution for the purpose of carrying out specific tasks. The assignment may last up to a year in the course of a period of five years. 





801.    An example of such a temporary deployment is an order dated 3 July 1995, temporarily assigning Bogdan Sladojević and Momir Vranješ to the 30th PC. The document states that the transfers would last one year, in accordance with Article 58(3) of the Law on the VJ, and that upon termination the two officers were to return to the unit/institution from which they were transferred. In May 1995, VRS Main Staff requested Vuković to dispatch Svetozar Kosorić and Branko Karlica to the VRS pursuant to Article 58 of the Law on the VJ. Siniša Borović – the Chef de Cabinet of the Chief of the VJ General Staff from November 1994 until December 1996 - testified that Kosorić was temporarily seconded to the VRS in accordance with the VRS request, and assigned to the Intelligence Department in the Drina Corps Command. 

802.    There is also evidence that some secondments were made directly to the VRS without going through the 30th PC. For example, in March 1994, Panić, the Commander of the Special Units Corps (“SUC”), agreed to send two sergeants to the VRS for one year pursuant to Article 58 of the Law on the VJ, with the understanding that the two soldiers were not appointed to the 30th PC and that they would return to the SUC before the expiration of the year in case of engagement of the SUC in combat. One of these officers was Milorad Pelemiš, who was later involved in the takeover of Vlasenica in July 1995 as acting Commander of the 10th Sabotage Detachment. 
6. VJ Officers who Refused to be Transferred to the VRS and SVK

803.    As discussed earlier, the order establishing the PCs did not contain any provision on the termination of service of VJ members who refused to comply with a transfer order to the PCs. Vuković, however, made it clear that those VJ officers who refused to take up positions in the SVK or VRS would be in one way or another dismissed from the VJ. This policy did not change over time and Vuković addressed the issue during the SDC meeting of 21 July 1994. In discussing the potential deployment of 1,143 men to the VRS and SVK, Vuković stressed that he could “only persuade them and they go or force them out of the VJ in another way”. The subsequent discussion between the SDC members shows that they were concerned by possible complaints filed by the affected officers. The SDC finally decided that the deployment of VJ officers to the VRS and SVK should continue, while concluding that it was necessary to maintain the appearance that these officers were going on a voluntary basis and that Vuković would deal with those who refused. 

804.    The Trial Chamber notes that several witnesses contested that such practice in fact took shape. Siniša Borović commented on two requests from the VRS to Vuković, dated respectively April and May 1995, regarding the provision of specific VJ officers. Both requests bear a handwritten note by Vuković stating that a proposal for their deployment should be prepared only after
consultation with the requested officers. Borović stated that no VJ officer was ever forced to go to the VRS. Petar Škrbić testified that in 1992, those JNA/VJ officers who did not leave for the VRS were “castigated” whereas those that did were “encouraged and respected by their peers”. However, he also testified that until the end of 1993, when he worked in the Administration for Information of the VJ General Staff, he had not heard of any VJ officer who had been coerced to join the VRS as a result of threats of punishment, such as early retirement. Branko Gajić also insisted that VJ personnel who joined the VRS and the SVK did so only on a voluntary basis. 

805.    The Trial Chamber, however, notes that contrary to the abovementioned testimony, the record contains a solid body of evidence showing that officers assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs in fact did not have much choice in whether they were transferred. For example, on 5 September 1994, the Chief of the VJ General Staff ordered the deployment of a number of VJ officers to the 40th PC, but a number of them either refused to obey the order or subsequently and deliberately left the units of the 40th PC. Documentary evidence shows that these officers were called for an interview with Vuković, following which the majority accepted to be deployed to the 40th PC, while a procedure for termination of service was initiated against two officers. The document continues to state that, should these two officers wish to avoid termination of their professional service, they should report to the units of the 40th PC. Nikolić testified that this suggested that the termination of their service was initiated because they refused to go to the SVK and the only way to avoid termination was to accept deployment to the SVK. 

806.    A letter sent from the Command of the VJ 1st Army to the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration dated 24 June 1996 is also illustrative of this policy. The letter reports that Dane Petrović’s request for a regular promotion was denied twice because he had refused transfer to the 40th PC in March and June 1995, in line with the Chief of VJ General Staff opinion regarding the “decelerated movement in the service” of those active servicemen who refused assignments to the PCs. In July 1996, Vuković temporarily relieved Petrović from duty, as he had been declared partially unfit to perform his duties. Petrović appealed this decision to the Supreme Military Court in Belgrade but his appeal was rejected. He therefore decided to appeal to Slobodan Milošević directly on 24 December 1997. In this latest appeal, he stated that he had originally been temporarily deployed to the SVK for six months pursuant to Article 271 of the Law on the Armed Forces of the SFRY in June 1993. Upon his return to the VJ after six months, however, he found he had been “tricked and deceived” and that he had also been unlawfully denied promotion. 

807.    There is also evidence that VRS officer Lieutenant Colonel Erak filed a complaint in late
1994 to the Recruitment and Personnel Affairs Section of the Drina Corps Command regarding his transfer to the VRS. The complaint reads as follows:
- 
No one asked me for opinion regarding my transfer to the 30th Personnel Centre. I have been transferred 7 times so far, and I am of opinion that … I should not have been transferred to the VRS without my personal consent; I have refused /to be transferred/ and that is why I did not sign the report about taking charge of the duty … .- 
I have been transferred to the VRS in accordance with Article 58 of the Law on VJ, and on the same ground I should not have and could not have been transferred to the 30th PC. 

Erak ultimately requested to be transferred back to his garrison in Zrenjanin. Petar Škrbić testified that Erak eventually left the VRS without authorisation and was thus considered a deserter. 

808.    MP-80 testified that he was not aware of any officers who directly refused to serve in the SVK or VRS, but many turned to “dishonorable” means to avoid service, such as getting medical certificates, sick leave or using connections. MP-14, on the other hand, testified that he was not given any choice in 1992 as to whether he wanted to remain with the JNA or serve in the VRS. In
his words, he was “left … there without pay … and told he couldn’t go to Serbia”. 

809.    The Trial Chamber finds that although many VJ officers volunteered or readily accepted to be transferred to the VRS or SVK, those who refused or were reticent to go were pressured or coerced to do so by threats of early retirement or termination of service. The Trial Chamber also finds that the evidence on the creation of the PCs shows that Vuković intended the deployment of VJ officers to the VRS and SVK to be obligatory under threat of termination of service, but decided not to include any such clause in writing anywhere in order to avoid litigation that would expose the involvement of the VJ in the conflict in Croatia and BiH. 
7. Redeployment to the VJ

810.    The VJ General Staff Instructions, issued by Vuković on 8 December 1993, provided that VJ personnel sent to the VRS or SVK through the 30th and 40th PCs could be redeployed to the VJ. It stated:





In keeping with service requirements, professional soldiers and civilian personnel sent or transferred to the PC may be returned, assigned or transferred to the [VJ] units/institutions with the consent or on the recommendation of the PC Main Staff. 





Such “consent or recommendations” were to be sent to the PC personnel department, which would then direct the person “to report to his previous unit/institution or transfer, assign or appoint them to a post (within the purview of the Chief of the VJ General Staff and President of the FRY … ) in
the [VJ]”. 

811.    The Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff also issued instructions specifically to the 40th PC Main Staff, explaining the procedure for the redeployment of members of the 40th PC to the VJ. According to the instructions, personnel transferred to the 40th PC could only return to the VJ in order to “meet needs of the service, or due to health requirements of the person or members of his family”. Furthermore, the requests for such transfer could be submitted “only through the 40th PC Main Staff and with the 40th PC Main Staff Commander’s signature”. However, transfers could “be executed only after [receipt] of response – approval from the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration”. 

812.    The Trial Chamber was presented with several personnel files which included orders from the VJ redeploying members from service in the PCs to the VJ. For example, Ðuro Vojković was redeployed from temporary duty in the “11th Corps of the 40th [PC]” to duty in the VJ “due to special needs of service” by order of the VJ General Staff on 7 April 1994; Radislav Krstić was
transferred from the 30th PC to the VJ Military Academy by the VJ General Staff on 18 January 1995; Stojan Spanović was transferred from his position in the 40th PC as Chief of Staff and Deputy Commander of the 11th Corps to the VJ 1st Army on 26 May 1996 by the VJ General Staff “in accordance with the needs of the service”; and Dragan Šarac was transferred by Vuković from his position in the 40th PC as SVK Main Staff Chief of Security to the VJ Military Academy in October 1994. 

813.    The Prosecution submits that officers moved fluidly between the VRS, SVK and VJ pursuant to Vuković’s orders and based on the needs of service of the VJ. The Prosecution acknowledges that, as stated in the VJ General Staff Instructions, officers’ requests to return to the VJ were reviewed by, and required the consent of the respective VRS or SVK commanders. It argues that such consent ensured that the needs of service of the VRS and SVK would be protected. Moreover, the Prosecution submits that this requirement essentially enabled the VRS and SVK commanders to act as “gatekeepers”, preventing the unauthorised return of officers to the FRY. However, the Prosecution asserts that the VJ, and Vuković personally, was the ultimate authority on whether an individual served in one of the PCs or in the FRY, and that where the needs of the VJ overrode those of the SVK or VRS, officers were required to return to the FRY. 

814.    The Defence argues that the VRS and SVK, not the VJ, made the final decisions regarding the redeployment of officers to the VJ. The Defence does not dispute that, in some instances, officers were permitted to return to the VJ at their own request, but maintains that individual requests by VRS and SVK officers to redeploy to the VJ were reviewed and decided upon by commanders of the VRS and SVK. The Defence further argues that Vuković played no role in these decisions and that there is no evidence to support the contention that he was able to influence or overrule the VRS or SVK in any decisions regarding redeployment. 
(a) Requests for Redeployment

815.    Evidence shows instances where members of the PCs requested permission to leave their positions in the VRS and SVK and be redeployed to the VJ. Moreover, at least some of these requests were sent directly to units within the VRS or SVK, not to the VJ. For example, on 16
August 1994, Miroslav Dadić sent a request to the Drina Corps Command to be redeployed from Military Post 7111 to his original unit in the VJ, wherein he explained that he went to the VRS voluntarily for a three-month period and was told that he would only be there on a “temporary basis”. Ljubiša Miličić instead sent his request to be returned from the Drina Corps to the VJ directly to Vuković. The request was however forwarded back to Miličić’s commanding officer in the 1st Zvornik Infantry Brigade Command of the Drina Corps, with a request that he “read it carefully … and to give his opinion and return to this Command as soon as possible”. 

816.    The Trial Chamber was presented with instances where the VRS approved such redeployment requests made by personnel before redeployment to the VJ could take effect. For example, on 18 April 1996, Mladić sent a letter “to the 30th PC”, approving the request to transfer Dragomir Milošević from his position as Commander of the SRK in the VRS to the VJ, stating that
he should be “transferred and appointed according to the needs of the service to the VJ ”. 

Similarly, on 25 December 1996, the VRS Main Staff sent a letter, signed by Škrbić, to Savo Jojić informing him that his “request for transfer to the VJ outside of the 30th PC was discussed at the Advisory Board” of the Commander of the VRS Main Staff. At the meeting, a decision was made to forward the request to the 30th PC “for deliberation with a proposal to the officer in charge to issue an order for transfer to the VJ outside the 30th PC ”. 

817.    Regarding such requests by personnel for redeployment to the VJ, Škrbić testified that:





All the requests for transfer to the VJ were discussed at … the collegium meeting of the commander of the Main Staff. It was the commander who ultimately decided on such requests and for the most part they were denied. Only those requests involving individuals who were ill, seriously wounded, or had family difficulties were accepted. 





Moreover, VRS involvement in the decisions to redeploy personnel to the VJ was referred to in a 4 November 1994 letter from Mladić regarding the status of VRS officers and soldiers. Due to dealing with other important combat issues at the time, Mladić stated that: “[P]recisely for this reason, we are not able to review and decide on requests for transfer to [the] VJ, except in emergency cases, i.e. personal sickness, or that of a family member”. 

818.    In other instances the VRS Main Staff denied requests from members of the 30th PC to be redeployed to the VJ, due to needs of the army or because adequate replacements were not available. A letter from the VRS Main Staff addressing one of these requests referred to the fact that “[T]he final decision to send back officers assigned under Article [58(3) of the Law on VJ] …
shall be passed by the Commander of the VRS Main Staff … in agreement with the competent VJ General Staff officer … ”. 

819.    The SVK also, at times, denied requests submitted by personnel in the SVK to be transferred back to the VJ. During a May 1994 coordination meeting of the VJ General Staff, Čeleketić reportedly stated that:





an increasing number of commanding officers, currently in the SVK, are demanding to return, that is, to be transferred to the VJ. Without adequate replacements, apart [from] exceptional cases (terminal illness), we won’t be able to approve their return to the VJ. 





Moreover, according to MP-80, Vuković supported Čeleketić’s decision to only allow replacements or transfers from the SVK back to the VJ in exceptional cases. 
(b) Vuković’s Role in the Redeployment of Personnel

820.    Witness MP-5 testified that transfers between the VRS and the VJ “worked in both directions”. However, he admitted that “he never had a chance to find out” if any officer belonging to the 30th PC serving with the VRS was ever ordered by the VJ to go back to the VJ. 

821.    Defence witness Petar Škrbić testified that as VJ Chief of General Staff, Vuković could not order a VRS soldier to go back to the VJ and that redeployment orders were not issued without the consent of the VRS. 

822.    Skrbić also explained that, as in his own situation, members of the PCs could be placed “at the disposal of the VJ” if they had not accumulated sufficient years of service, and therefore, were not eligible for pension. As an example, Škrbić testified that he informed Plavšić that he no longer wished to remain in the VRS and requested to be put at the disposal of the VJ and that she approved his request. 

823.    As discussed above, the Trial Chamber was presented with several personnel files which included orders from the VJ General Staff redeploying personnel from service in the PCs to the VJ. In addition, the Trial Chamber received the following evidence regarding Vuković’s personal involvement in redeploying personnel to the VJ.

824.    On 5 October 1994, Vuković issued an order redeploying Bodgan Sladojević from his position as Commander of the “11th Corps of the [VJ] General Staff 40th PC ” to the Novi Sad Corps of the VJ. The 11th Corps was part of the SVK. Sladojević obeyed the order and took over the duty of Commander of the 12th Mechanized Brigade of the Novi Sad Corps of the VJ 1st Army on 1 November 1994. There is nothing in the order, nor in Sladojević’s personnel file, to suggest that there was any approval or other action taken by the SVK regarding Sladojević’s redeployment. 

825.    Additionally, the Office of the VJ Chief of General Staff ordered VJ Major General Branislav Petrović to return to duty in the VJ Air Force after serving with the Slavonia-Baranja Corps (“SBC”), the 11th Corps. On 24 October 1995, in a letter addressed to “Colonel General Vuković, personally”, the SBC Command requested that Branislav Petrović be allowed to remain in the SBC until the completion of operations. The following day, the Assistant Chief of the VJ Air Force responded to the Office of the Chief of General Staff that Petrović needed to return to duty in the VJ Air Force Administration because he had “completed preparations for combat operations of the 11th Corps, for which he was deployed”. On 26 October 1995, the Office of the VJ Chief of General Staff sent a telegram back to the SBC Command denying its request for Petrović to remain in the territory, requiring Petrović to return to duty in the VJ Air Force Administration. The Prosecution alleges that this example in particular shows that Vuković was the “ultimate arbiter” of whether an individual served in the PCs or returned to the FRY. The Trial Chamber notes that it does not have sufficient evidence to determine whether Branislav Petrović was a member of the 40th PC, or if he was, in fact, directly seconded to the SVK.

826.    Two additional documents in evidence, related to VRS officer Tihomir Babić, demonstrate that the VJ General Staff issued orders on the redeployment of personnel and that those orders were complied with by the VRS. The first document is an order issued by the VRS Main Staff on 14 August 1994 and sent to the Drina Corps Command. It ordered the transfer of Tihomir Babić from the 30th PC to the VJ, “pursuant to an order No. 5-193” of 17 June 1994, which was an order from the Chief of Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff transferring Babić back to the VJ 1st Army. The reference to order “No. 5-193” shows that the VRS Main Staff executed an order by the VJ General Staff transferring Babić back to the VJ. The second document is the subsequent order from the Drina Corps Command dated 16 August 1994, transferring Babić from the VRS to the VJ 1st Army, in execution of order “No. 5-193” from the VJ General Staff. 

827.    Defence witness Petar Škrbić claimed that these orders failed to mention that VRS approval was required. He further testified that the Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff would have issued the transfer order only after receiving approval from the Commander of the VRS Main Staff. Škrbić also insisted that the Drina Corps Command order was drafted incorrectly and that it should have been issued in execution of the order from the VRS Main Staff. He maintained that when he took up the position as Head of the Organisation, Mobilisation and Personnel section of the VRS Main Staff, “ they executed things only on the approval of the Commander of the Main Staff of the VRS. Nobody else’s, you can be sure of that”. Defence witness Branko Gajić also testified that Babić could not have been redeployed to the VJ without previous authorisation from the VRS Main Staff. 

828.    The Prosecution submits that MP-80 confirmed that Vuković was the ultimate superior on issues of transfer for members of the 40th PC. However, the Trial Chamber notes that MP-80 stated that:





In issues of transfer, retirement, et cetera, the qualified person was General Vuković. Or, rather, let me correct that, the FRY SDC could send [a VJ general serving in the 40th PC] into retirement and that's what they did. 





829.    The Trial Chamber finds that MP-80 is ambiguous on this point and that he generally referred to Vuković as the “qualified person” for transfer, although he then partially corrected himself by referring only to retirement and placing this authority higher on the ladder— on the SDC. 
(c) Final Findings

830.    Based on the foregoing, the Trial Chamber finds that as a rule, personnel serving in the VRS and SVK through the 30th and 40th PCs could be redeployed to VJ units. The evidence clearly shows that when the request for redeployment came from the PC member himself, it was granted only if his superior in the VRS or SVK consented to such transfer; subsequently, the VJ would order the transfer. At the same time, the record contains some VJ orders of transfer initiated by the VJ, rather than by the PC member, transferring both 30th and 40th PC members back to the VJ, without evidence of prior approval from the VRS or the SVK. However, in light of the testimony of Škrbić and Gajić, the Trial Chamber cannot conclude beyond a reasonable doubt that these VJ orders for redeployment could be carried out without approval from the VRS and SVK.

831.    The question of Vuković’s ability to order the redeployment of members of the 30th and 40th PCs will be further discussed in the section devoted to his alleged effective control over the VRS and SVK under Article 7(3) of the Statute. 
8. De Jure Status of Members of the Personnel Centres

832.    Military personnel assigned to the PCs remained members of the VJ and exercised their rights in the FRY and the VJ through the 30th and 40th PCs. 

833.    As will be described in greater detail in the following paragraphs, members of the PCs received their salaries from the VJ and enjoyed benefits such as housing, health care (including for family members) and education benefits, like any other member of the VJ. 

834.    Vuković himself recognised that the soldiers assigned to the PCs possessed the status of VJ members. At the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Vuković explained that the purpose of the verification of promotions obtained in the VRS and SVK was necessary so that officers transferred there would continue to enjoy all the rights in the VJ with respect to “the ranks they acquire there”. At the SDC session of 25 December 1993, Vuković summarised the number of VJ commissioned and non-commissioned officers and stated “ t here are 7,233 of them in two personnel centres in RS and RSK . When planning any kind of welfare assistance these people should be included”. Similarly, when counting the total number of VJ officers during the subsequent SDC session, Vuković included those serving in the RS and RSK. 

835.    Several judgements issued by the Military Supreme Court in Belgrade in relation to claims filed by members of the 30th and 40th PCs for compensation of unused annual leave during the war confirmed that those members retained their status as VJ members while serving in the VRS and SVK. In all of these cases, the parties did not dispute that during the period for which compensation was sought, the officers, as VJ members, were serving outside the VJ on orders of a superior officer and that they did not use their annual leave. The Military Supreme Court reversed the decision of the PCs denying those claims and affirmed that because the claimants were professional soldiers of the VJ during the period in question, the provisions of the Law on the VJ applied to them. The Court went further to state that:





It is the legal understanding of the Court that the legal position of a serviceman whom the competent officer sent outside the VJ and who did not take his annual leave due to a raised level of combat readiness and engagement in combat operations, is to be brought in line with the position of a serviceman whose annual leave was suspended or cut short by the Chief of the VJ General Staff due to extraordinary needs of service. 





836.    The Military Supreme Court adopted the same reasoning in relation to a claim of a VJ professional soldier who had been deployed through the 40th PC to the RSK. The Federal Court, seised of a request for extraordinary review, rejected the request and upheld the judgement of the Military Supreme Court. 

837.    In addition, the Trial Chamber particularly notes that the Second Municipal Court in Belgrade concluded that Dragomir Milošević retained the status as a VJ member throughout the period he served in the VRS. The case concerned a lawsuit filed by Dragomir Milošević against the FRY for compensation of non-material damages suffered following his wounding on the battlefield near Sarajevo on 17 May 1995. The FRY, represented by the Military Legal Office of the VJ, argued that Milošević did not have the passive legitimacy to make such a claim, because at the time of the wounding he was a member of the VRS and not of the VJ. 

838.    In addressing this objection the Court stated:





The court is of the opinion that this objection was not valid since, based on the evidence presented during the proceedings, it was established beyond reasonable doubt that the plaintiff was a professional officer of the VJ at the time of wounding and was on its payroll throughout that time and that his participation on the front in the general sector of Zlatište near Sarajevo was certainly in agreement with or with the knowledge of the General Staff of the VJ . Had that not been the case, an unauthorized arrival of the plaintiff as a professional officer of the VJ at the front in another, internationally recognized state would have resulted in the termination of his employment, and neither did his superior ever initiate such a measure against the plaintiff, nor was evidence to that effect presented before this court by the end of the proceedings. 





839.    The Municipal Court also established that even though Dragomir Milošević belonged to the
30th PC at the time of his wounding, he was a member of the JNA and VJ “without any interruptions” from 27 July 1960 until his retirement on 31 December 1996. 

840.    Based on the above, as well as on the evidence discussed in relation to the creation of the PCs, the Trial Chamber finds that the members of the 30th and 40th PCs remained de jure members of the VJ while serving in the VRS and SVK.
(a) Promotions
(i) Law on Promotions

841.    According to the Law of the VRS, the President of the RS had the power to decide on the promotion of officers to the rank of major-general and higher and the Minister of Defence on the promotion of active and reserve commissioned and non-commissioned officers up to and including the rank of lieutenant-colonel. According to Article 370 of the Law on the VRS, the Minister of Defence could delegate such power (and others) to other officers, normally the VRS Commander and/or the Corps Commanders. The evidence shows, that in June 1992, the then Minister of Defence Bogdan Subotić, issued such delegation to the Commander of the VRS. Stojan Malčić testified that promotion orders in the VRS were final and took effect immediately. Petar Škrbić – Assistant Commander of Sector for Recruitment, Mobilisation and System Affairs in the VRS Main Staff from 1994 – stated that VRS promotions were made public and that promotion orders were transmitted to the individuals in question as soon as was practicable. The promotion procedure in the SVK was similar. The President of the RSK had the authority to decide on the promotion of officers to the rank of Major General and higher, upon the recommendation of the SDC. The Commander of the SVK had the authority to promote officers up to and including the rank of Colonel. 

842.    According to the Law on the VJ, officers were promoted to the rank of General and higher by the President of the FRY. Article 46 of the Law on the VJ empowers the President to exceptionally promote officers to the rank of General at the proposal of the Chief of the VJ General Staff. The Chief of the VJ General Staff could promote officers up to and including the rank of Colonel. He also had the authority to exceptionally promote to the rank immediately above the rank of Colonel. 
(ii) The Procedure of Verification

843.    The evidence shows that the promotions process for members of the 30th and 40th PCs entailed a dual procedure: PC members promoted in the VRS and SVK were later also promoted in the VJ after a “verification” process. 

844.    The statement of reasons attached to the proposed order on the creation of the PCs of 8 October 1993 already contained an indication of the dual promotion procedure. The relevant part reads that “ p romotions to a higher rank … at the proposal or by decision of the President of the RS and RSK … or military organ, would also be conducted in the VJ pursuant to the Law on the VJ ”. During the SDC session of 11 October 1993, Vuković explained to the SDC members that the promotions granted by the VRS and SVK were valid in those armies, but not in the VJ. The verification process would be the means to enable these officers to enjoy in the FRY all the rights attached to the ranks they acquired in the SVK and VRS. He further emphasised that he was insisting that these officers should have the “same status as officers” in the VJ, so that they and their families could enjoy certain benefits. 

845.    Škrbić explained that once the promotions were granted in the VRS, the VRS Main Staff sent the list of the promoted persons to the 30th PC with a proposal that their new VRS rank be verified by the VJ. After the verification, the VJ issued its promotion order which was then published in the VJ’s Official Gazette. The officers concerned would receive an excerpt of the Gazette bearing the date of the promotion. The Trial Chamber received evidence that a similar dual procedure of promotions applied to the SVK. 

846.    As an illustration of the procedure in the VRS, the Trial Chamber notes that on 23 June 1994, Vinko Pandurević and Dragan Obrenović, members of the 30th PC, were extraordinarily promoted to the ranks of Infantry Lieutenant Colonel and Major, respectively, by order of the VRS Main Staff Commander Ratko Mladić. They were then extraordinarily promoted to the same ranks in the VJ by order of the Chief of VJ General Staff of 16 June 1995. The VJ Personnel file of Pandurević further indicates that he was also extraordinarily promoted to the rank of Infantry Colonel on 31 December 1995 by order of Vuković. 

847.    As for promotions within the SVK, Rade Rašeta testified that while he was serving in the SVK he was promoted to a higher rank in the SVK, which was then reflected in his personnel file in the 40th PC. When Novaković was promoted to the rank of a Colonel-General in the SVK, this was then verified by a decree of the President of the FRY. Evidence also shows that Vuković exercised his authority to exceptionally promote members of the 40th PC serving in the SVK. For instance, Vuković exceptionally promoted both Bosanac and Krajnović on 3 February 1994 to the ranks of Lieutenant Colonels. 

848.    There is evidence, however, that not all promotions in the VRS were “verified” by the VJ. Malčić testified that for the promotions to the rank of General, it was a prerequisite in the VJ regulations that the officer had graduated from the School of the National Defence, whereas the same prerequisite did not apply in the VRS. Consequently, not all of the promotions to the rank of General granted by the VRS were verified and granted by the VJ. 

849.    The Trial Chamber also notes that, for example, Živanović was promoted from the rank of
Major General to that of Lieutenant General by RS Presidential decree of 12 July 1995. However, a 2001 decision from the 30th PC regarding his compensation for unused annual leave refers to him as “retired Major General”, suggesting that his promotion was not verified by the VJ. Similarly, the evidence shows that Galić’s VRS promotion of August 1994 to the rank of Lieutenant General by RS Presidential decree was not verified by the VJ. Rajko Petrović also testified that the 30th PC did not verify his promotion by the VRS Main Staff to the rank of Captain
1st Class. 

850.    The Trial Chamber notes that there were also instances in which the promotion in the VJ preceded the promotion in the VRS. For example, Ratko Mladić was exceptionally promoted to the rank of Colonel General by a FRY Presidential decree of 16 June 1995, in which he is identified as Commander of the Main Staff of the 30th PC. Then, on 28 June 1995, he was exceptionally promoted to the same rank in the VRS by RS Presidential decree. The decree refers to him as the Commander of the VRS Main Staff. Škrbić testified that he was aware of only one other occasion in which a VRS officer was promoted first in the FRY and only a couple of days later in the RS, the case of Radivoje Miletić. 
(iii) The Effect of the “Verification”

851.    Both Defence and Prosecution witnesses articulated the significance and effect of VJ verifications. Malčić testified that verification was a formal recognition of a VRS rank by the VJ, which was necessary for the calculation of the new salary:



The basic idea was that officers should be appointed and promoted in accordance with the regulations of the Army of Republika Srpska. However, in order for them to receive salaries, this had to be accorded with regulations in the Army of Yugoslavia. That is to say that we had two systems of laws, if I can put it that way, according to which we worked, the laws of Republika Srpska; and in order to have that verified, it had to be adjusted to the regulations in the Army of
Yugoslavia so that it could be sent to the accounting centre so their salaries could be calculated. 



852.    Škrbić confirmed that a higher rank carried a higher salary and thus the new VRS rank needed to be verified by the VJ. Non-verification of a VRS rank by the VJ resulted in the newly promoted officer not receiving a salary in accordance with his new rank. However he was still allowed to display his new rank and command the VRS forces. 

853.    Milenko Jevđević stated that while he was serving in the VRS he was promoted twice, in 1993 and again in 1994, and each time the promotion required verification by the VJ under the auspices of the 30th PC, before the salary commensurate with the higher rank would be paid. Similarly, Milenko Živanović's promotion to Major General is reflected – after the VJ verification – in his FRY MOD payment slips for 1994 and 1995. Since Jevđević's promotion of 1994 to the rank of Major was not verified by the VJ until June of 1995, he did not receive the commensurate salary until that time. 

854.    The Trial Chamber also received evidence that Galić's exceptional promotion to the rank of Lieutenant General in the VRS was not verified in the VJ. A written request to verify Galić's rank was made by the VRS to the VJ on 31 December 1996, noting that the failure to confirm his new rank constituted “a great disservice to him”. 

855.    In relation to the personal significance of the promotion verification, Novaković testified that the verification by the VJ “meant a lot to him ”. 
(iv) Role of Vuković in the “Verification” Process

856.    The Prosecution submits that Vuković played an integral role in the promotion of officers serving in the VRS and SVK to equivalent ranks in the VJ; the purpose of which was to provide practical benefits, moral support and motivation to those officers. 

857.    The Defence instead maintains that the final determination as to whether to promote a particular officer fell within the purview of the VRS and SVK and was carried out and finalised within those armies. Vuković played neither a role in assessing the suitability of such promotions nor in the decisions taken by the VRS and SVK, but rather brought forward the proposals to the SDC. In particular, the Defence argues that Vuković was not privy to any assessments of the persons promoted by the VRS and SVK. 

858.    As stated above, the promotion and verification of personnel serving in the VRS and SVK was on the agenda for the SDC session of 11 October 1993. Vuković enumerated the names of officers proposed for promotion by the VRS and SVK, ´explaining that they requested these promotions to be verified in the VJ. These included the promotion within the VRS of Dušan Kovačević and Bodgan Subotić to the rank of Major General, and within the SVK of Mile Novaković and Borislav Đukić to the rank of Major General. 

859.    On this occasion, Vuković accepted Milošević's suggestion to seek further information about these officers from Mladić before verifying the promotions. He stated that while he knew some of them, he had no basis for an opinion about “a large number of these people” and did not want to put the SDC in a position to “promot e certain people I don’t know”. At the following SDC session of 10 November 1993, Vuković confirmed that Mladić had “reported” back to him on the proposed officers and the verification of the promotions was accepted by the SDC. There is evidence that Mladić subsequently informed Kovačević that his promotion had been verified by the SDC. 

860.    In its Final Brief, the Defence argues that “a prior opinion or report from Mladić was neither a practice nor a systematic part of the verification process” and that Milošević’s request to Vuković at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 “to obtain the opinion of Mladić was formulated prior the formation of PCs where there was no mechanism in place to recognize the newly afforded rights that were attached to the new ranks”. The Trial Chamber notes that, indeed, the procedure used during the 11 October 1993 SDC meeting preceded the creation of the PCs and could very well be exceptional. At the same time, however, contrary to the Defence position that Vuković had no role in assessing the suitability of promotions, the Trial Chamber received extensive evidence of Vuković’s direct involvement in the verification process also after the creation of the PCs.

861.    Illustratively, Milan Čeleketić was promoted by the SVK from the rank of a Colonel to the rank of Major-General in February 1994 and the “verification” of his promotion was discussed during the SDC session of 16 March 1994. On this occasion, Vuković suggested to wait until they could see how he would do in the new position, as he had just taken up duty. Čeleketić’s promotion therefore was not verified until June 1994. The further promotion of Milan Čeleketić to the rank of Lieutenant General and of Dušan Lončar to Major General was discussed at the SDC session on 13 June 1995. On this occasion, Vuković told the SDC that their promotions should not be recognised, as they were “guilty” for the situation in the RSK. The evidence shows that there are no promotions after the date of 16 June 1994, as noted in Čeleketić’s VJ personnel file. 

862.    Similarly, during the SDC session of 11 July 1994, the verification of promotions of VRS officers – including Manojlo Milovanović to the rank of Lieutenant General, and Milan Gvero and Dragomir Milošević to the rank of Major General – and the pensioning off of others were discussed. Vuković stated that he could give his opinion on each of the officers put forward for promotion and/or retirement. During this session, however, no promotions were verified. The SDC members questioned the verification process and Lilić insisted that the VRS should make promotions only if previously agreed on with Vuković. The Trial Chamber notes that the promotions of Milovanović to the rank of Lieutenant General and of Dragomir Milošević to Major General were verified by the SDC on 27 December 1995, almost one year and half later. 

863.    During the SDC session held on 13 June 1995, the promotion of 12 generals put forward by the 30th PC was up for discussion. Of the 12 generals put forward for promotion, Vuković proposed to verify the promotion of only six: Ðukić, Gvero, Miletić, Tolimir, Marić and Novak. Vuković supported the promotion of Gvero, as he was “an extremely positive person who is a cohesive force between the Republika Srpska Army and us” and of Tolimir, as he had been “much criticized, primarily by President Karad`ić, because he stands in their way of exercising their in- depth influence”. The promotions of Stevan Tomić, Dragomir Milošević and Budimir Gavrić were rejected by Vuković on the basis of their membership of the Serbian Democratic Party. Vuković did not give reasons for rejecting the promotions of Mićo Grubor, Mićo Vlaisavljević and Milutin Skočajić. The SDC accepted all of his proposals. The next day, the FRY President issued the decree whereby Milan Gvero was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant General, and Zdravko Tolimir and Radivoje Miletić to the rank of Major General. According to the decree, all three men were serving in the VJ General Staff 30th PC and their promotion was effective starting on 16 June 1995. 

864.    The Defence also argues that while VRS and SVK decisions to promote a particular individual were forwarded to Vuković with a request for verification, neither reason nor criteria for said promotions were provided by the VRS and the SVK. The Trial Chamber recalls Škrbić’s testimony that indeed the VRS Main Staff drew up statements of reasons and completed “promotion questionnaires” for all the promotions it granted, but none of these were provided to the 30th PC. However, the Trial Chamber also recalls that the PCs regulated the paperwork and kept record of VJ personnel serving in the VRS and SVK. This included ensuring a “timely entry of data … on promotions in the VJ … and on assessment” of all personnel recorded in the PCs. Through the PCs, therefore, Vuković had at his disposal information on all personnel serving in the PCs. Against this backdrop and considering the SDC session records discussed above, the Trial Chamber finds that Vuković was personally aware of the character and performance of members of the PCs proposed for promotion verification. He therefore had information available that he would assess to decide whether those officers were suitable for a promotion within the VJ. After such assessment - for officers submitted for verification to the rank of General - Vuković would make proposals before the SDC on their suitability for promotion in the VJ.

865.    In addition to the individuals discussed above, the Trial Chamber has received evidence on the promotion and verification of, inter alia, the following: Radivoje Miletić, Radislav Krstić, Vujadin Popović, Vidoje Blagojević, Dragan Jokić and Drago Nikolić. 
(v) Final Findings

866.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that as a general rule, promotions were first granted in the VRS and SVK in accordance with the laws of the RS and RSK, respectively. The VRS and SVK Main Staffs would then send a list of promotions to the VJ General Staff with a request that they be verified. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that the verification and promotions within the VJ were made according to the Law on the VJ. Hence, Vuković retained the authority to promote members of the PCs up to and including the rank of Colonel and had the power of proposal to the FRY President for exceptional promotion to the rank of General. The Trial Chamber also finds that Vuković decided whether a promotion in the VJ was merited based on his own assessment of character and performance of the members of the PCs proposed for promotion verification. Finally, the verification and corresponding promotion in the VJ allowed the PC members to enjoy the benefits and rights attached to the new rank, most importantly a commensurate salary.
(b) Salaries

867.    Several witnesses testified that officers who served in the VRS or SVK through the 30th and 40th PCs received their salaries and other benefits from the VJ. Stamenko Nikolić estimated that between 4,000 and 4,700 military personnel in the VRS were entitled to a salary from the VJ, while in the SVK, this number never exceeded 4,000 persons. With particular emphasis on 1995, he testified that in that period 2,421 officers and contract soldiers received their salaries through the 30th PC and 930 through the 40th PC. There is also evidence that the payment of salaries for members of the 30th PC was suspended for six months. This interruption coincided with Serbia’s imposition of sanctions on the RS when its leadership refused to sign the Vance-Owen peace plan. 

868.    The Defence submits that the Chief of the VJ General Staff was not involved in either the budget determinations, which were the responsibility of the MOD, or in the determination of salaries, which were the responsibility of the Federal Government. The Defence argues that, based on the Law on the VJ, the MOD was responsible for implementing regulations - approved by the Federal Government - related to salary and other forms of remuneration. Furthermore, the MOD, through its accounting centre, which collected the data related to VJ officers, calculated the salaries according to the regulations and issued the payments. 

869.    The Trial Chamber recalls that the MOD was responsible for the annual national defence budget that was eventually submitted to the FRY Assembly for approval. This annual budget included the budgetary needs for both the MOD and the VJ. The evidence shows that the VJ General Staff participated in the planning of the annual budget by submitting its plan for budgetary needs to the MOD, for its subsequent approval by the Minister of Defence and inclusion in the annual budget. It was a common practice for the VJ General Staff to also informally coordinate its efforts with the MOD in preparing a realistic budget proposal for the approval of the Minister. The largest expenditure within the VJ budget was for salaries and this included the necessary funds to pay members of the 30th and 40th PCs. The evidence shows that in the plan for budgetary needs, the VJ General Staff identified the total number of personnel entitled to a salary and its estimate of the total funds needed to cover the salaries. 

870.    Illustratively, at the 17th Session of the SDC held on 10 January 1994, Vuković justified the request of 88.75 million dollars in the budget proposal for the salary of military personnel in the following way:



We have a total of 16,000 officers, including those in the RSK and the RS . They had an average of 60.34 dollars … .We have 13,000 non-commissioned officers; 20,000 contract soldiers – now we have 12,000 of them. We plan to hire so many to make up for the soldiers we lack. …We have 24,000 civilians – in all three states.This means that the total paid active duty service personnel in the RSK , RS and SRJ is 73,722. 



871.    At the SDC session of 7 June 1994, Vuković specified that:



In RS we support and pay for 4,173 persons, or 7.42% from the VJ , and in the RSK 1,474 persons or 2.62% from the VJ ; that is a total of 5,647 persons. We allot around 14 million for them each year and we need the same amount for next year, and that’s just for the salaries. That’s
a great help to them. 



Those salaries were eventually paid by the Accounting Centre of the MOD with funds allocated to the VJ in the national defence budget. 

872.    However, the evidence also shows that in September 1994, while the payment of salaries had been interrupted in light of the sanctions on the RS, Vuković provided Mladić personally and directly with 500,000 Serb Dinars for the payment of salaries, without the involvement of the Accounting Centre of the MOD. 

873.    The Law on the VJ provided the legal framework for the determination of salary and other forms of remuneration of military personnel. It defined the different elements of the salary structure as well as the circumstances in which payments could be reduced or suspended. The salary of military personnel was calculated based on rank, position and length of service. The salary structure included the so-called “military supplement” or “army addition”, as well as compensations (such as compensation for service under special conditions). 

874.    The Law on the VJ established the general principles governing the payment of salaries and vested the Federal Government with the function of defining, by way of decree, the specifics necessary to calculate them. As Nikolić stated, the MOD was “responsible for regulations governing salaries, pecuniary allowances, and other sorts of remuneration in the army in accordance with the Law on the Army of Yugoslavia”. 

875.    Against this backdrop, the VJ was in charge of receiving the salary-related information from VJ soldiers. The VJ General Staff Personnel Administration processed that information and sent it to the Accounting Centre of the MOD, which was in charge of paying these salaries. 

876.    Stojan Malčić explained how the salaries for members of the 30th PC were calculated. The information necessary to calculate the salary was contained in the appointment orders. On the basis of these orders, the Personnel Department of the VRS Main Staff drew up reports on hand- over of duty which were sent to the 30th PC. Once verified, the reports were transmitted to the Accounting Centre of the MOD which then issued the payment. The salary was only paid if appointments within the VRS were in compliance with the VJ rules. The same procedure applied to the officers serving in the SVK via the 40th PC. 

877.    Stojan Malčić testified that former JNA military personnel who remained in BiH to serve in the VRS received salaries as if they continued to serve with the JNA. Stamenko Nikolić also testified that former members of the JNA who had remained to serve in the VRS and SVK continued to receive their salaries from the FRY with the “cycle never being broken”. 

878.    The Trial Chamber was presented with evidence in relation to the payment of salaries to, inter alia, Ratko Mladić, Milan Čeleketić, Manojlo Milovanović, Radislav Krstić, Milenko Živanović, Vujadin Popović, Dragan Obrenović, Đorđe Đukić, Mile Novaković, Bogdan Sladojević, Radivoje Miletić, Milan Gvero, Zdravko Tolimir, Stanislav Galić and Dragomir Milošević. 

879.    In addition to a salary, members of the PCs received “special payments” for service at the time of their retirement. The Accounting Centre of the VJ General Staff was in charge of making these payments. For example, at the time of his retirement in 2000, Mladić received special payments for his service in the 30th PC. Two decisions issued by the 30th PC, on 11 October 2000 and 3 March 2000, stated that the payment Mladić was entitled to for his service with the 30th PC “shall be made by the Accounting Centre of the VJ/Yugoslav Army/GŠ/ General Staff”. Likewise, a decision of 20 September 2000 declared that Tolimir was entitled to payments for his service at the 30th PC “by the Accounting Centre of the VJ GŠ”. 

880.    The Trial Chamber is therefore satisfied that Vuković was directly involved in determining the funds needed for the payment of salaries for military personnel, including members of the 30th and 40th PCs. The Trial Chamber is further satisfied that the material payment of the salaries was made by the Accounting Centre of the MOD, with the funds that were allocated to the VJ in the national defence budget. In addition, the Trial Chamber is satisfied that the PCs, or the Personnel Administration of the VJ General Staff, provided the Accounting Centre of the MOD with all of the records and information necessary to calculate the salaries of the members of the 30th and 40th PCs.
(c) Pensions

881.    Several witnesses testified that members of the 30th and 40th PCs continued to be part of the VJ retirement plan, although they had served in the VRS and the SVK. 

882.    The VJ retirement plan was financed partly by contributions made by VJ military personnel, including members of the 30th and 40th PCs, during their service, and partly by funds allocated for this purpose within the yearly military budget. Both Nikolić and Jovanić testified that about 60 to 65% of the VJ military budget was allocated to pensions and salaries. Different estimates were provided, however, as to the portion of this sum allocated to pensions: 40%, according to Nikolić and about 20% according to Jovanić. 

883.    Service in the VRS and SVK by members of the 30th and 40th PCs, respectively, was counted by the VJ as continuous service time for the calculation of pensions. Illustratively, MP-14, a JNA career officer who served with the VRS as a member of the 30th PC, testified that upon his retirement from the VRS, his years of service both with the JNA and the VRS were added together for the calculation of his pension. The Trial Chamber heard that a similar pension regime applied to the SVK. Rade Rašeta explained that upon his retirement, his years of service with the SVK were added to his years of service with the JNA/VJ. 

884.    Articles 264 to 267 of the Law on the VJ provided for various regimes to calculate the pensionable service for professional soldiers. Pursuant to Article 264, those who participated in armed activities after 17 August 1990 as members of the VJ would have their time in service counted as double for the purpose of pension calculation. For those professional soldiers who carried out especially hard work or tasks that were hazardous to their health, the length of the pensionable service was calculated on an increased basis, depending on the “degree of hardship and harmfulness or the nature of work”. For example, 12 months spent on a certain duty could be counted as 15, 16 or 18 months for pensionable purposes. 

885.    Petar Škrbić testified as to the procedure for the provision of pensions for members of the 30th PC. He stated that the Sector for Recruitment, Mobilisation and System Affairs in the VRS Main Staff sent a list of the VRS retired servicemen to the 30th PC office in Belgrade. In turn, the 30th PC issued a decision in relation to their pensions based on the Law on the VJ. Illustratively, on 15 November 1995, Petar Škrbić issued a certificate stating that in 1992, General Manojlo Milovanović was transferred to Military Post 7572 in Sarajevo to help regulate Milovanović’s “accelerated pension plan” in accordance with Article 264 of the Law on the VJ. On 15 December 1995, the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration recognised Milovanović’s right to an accelerated pension plan. Similarly, the VJ Personnel Administration decided on 9 December 1994 that Colonel Jovo Kundačina was “entitled to have his service calculated as double as of 20 May 1992” for pension purposes. The VJ Personnel Administration also granted requests from Zdravko Tolimir to calculate as double his years of service with the VRS from 1990 until 1995. Witness Milenko Jevđević provided a similar account in relation to the calculations of his pensionable years of service. 

886.    The Trial Chamber received evidence that the calculation of double years of pensionable service in the VJ for wartime service in the VRS also applied to Ratko Mladić, Dragomir Milošević, Vinko Pandurević, Drago Nikolić, Vujadin Popović, Bogdan Subotić and Ljubiša Beara. The Trial Chamber also notes that, on 30 August 2002, the Military Social Insurance Fund in Belgrade granted Ratko Mladić’s personal request to an administrative pension. 

887.    The same procedure applied to members of the 40th PC. Rade Rašeta’s years of service with the SVK were similarly considered as double for the purpose of calculating his pension. Vuković himself granted Mile Mrkšić’s right to double his years of pensionable employment “after assessing the evidence and facts”. The right to double years of service was also granted to Čeleketić on 27 June 1994 by the VJ General Staff Personnel Administration. Rade Orlić's years of service in the SVK, instead, were calculated based on the accelerated length of service at the rate of 12/15 months, which lowered his retirement age by two years. 

888.    Stamenko Nikolić testified that it was the Military Social Insurance Fund (“SOVO”) – not the VJ General Staff - that calculated and distributed the pensions. Based on the foregoing evidence, the Trial Chamber understood Stamenko Nikolić to say that while the General Staff decided on the provision of pensions for members of the 30th and 40th PCs, the material calculation and distribution thereof were carried out by the SOVO.

889.    In sum, the Trial Chamber finds that the PCs decided on the recognition of pensionable years of service and on the provision of pensions, which were then paid by the SOVO.
(d) Housing

890.    On 17 August 1994, Vuković ordered that housing matters for members of the 30th and 40th PCs should be regulated in the same manner as other VJ members. According to this order, requests for housing of members of the 30th and 40th PCs had to be certified by the respective PC. Once certified, the applications were transmitted to the garrison from which the soldiers were dispatched. The Trial Chamber notes that the housing certificates in evidence demonstrate that a soldier’s periods of service in different units were considered as one continuous period of service. For example, a housing certificate issued to Veljko Bosanac in 1998 stipulated that he served continuously in the JNA/VJ from 1971 until 1996, despite the fact that he was transferred to the 40th PC in 1994 and served at the Novi Sad Garrison in 1995. 

891.    The Trial Chamber was presented with evidence showing that the housing needs of soldiers serving in the 30th and 40th PCs were addressed either by (i) the issuance of a housing certificate or by (ii) the provision of a family separation allowance. Witness MP-5, a 30th PC officer who served in the VRS, testified that personnel serving in the VRS through the 30th PC were provided with accommodation in the RS, or in the alternative, were financially compensated by the 30th PC. Stamenko Nikolić also testified that a soldier was entitled to have a housing facility provided to both him and his family by the VJ for the duration of his service. Likewise, Mile Novaković testified that when the JNA left Croatia, the soldiers who decided to stay in Krajina were still treated as being part of the JNA and were entitled to housing. They were asked to choose in which garrison in FRY territory they wanted to have an apartment allocated to them. If that accommodation was not available, they were financially compensated and such compensation was regulated through and paid for by the PCs. 

892.    Additionally, the Trial Chamber received evidence that soldiers were required to inform the VJ of any change in their housing situation. 

893.    Soldiers who were not provided housing at their garrison of service were entitled to a family allowance from the VJ. Defence witness Stojan Malčić testified that soldiers “were entitled to an allowance if they did not live in the same garrison with their families”. By way of example, the Trial Chamber notes a decision from the Military Post 4001, signed by General Milan Čeleketić, granting Ljubomir Cvjetan a family separation allowance in accordance with the Rules of Procedure on Travel and Other Expenses in the VJ. The decision stated that Cvjetan did not have free accommodation in the Knin area and shared a household with his family in Belgrade, and thus, was entitled to the allowance. 

894.    Additionally, on 3 November 1999, the Military Post at Bijeljina BiH issued a decision granting Vinko Pandurević a family separation allowance in accordance with the Regulation of Travel and Other Allowances in the VJ. The decision states, in relevant part, that a “professional soldier … who is supporting the family he is living with in common household, and who has an apartment on the territory of FRY, i.e. on the territory of the republics of the former SFRY … has a right to separation allowance if at the service post he has no apartment”. 

895.    Further evidence suggests that some members of the PCs, such as General Ratko Mladić in particular, received both housing and a family separation allowance from the VJ. Specifically, on 18 May 1994 and later, on 8 April 1997, Mladić was granted compensation for “expenses incurred for living apart from his family”. The decision of 8 April 1997 refers specifically to the fact that although Mladić was not provided an “official apartment at his place of service”, he was provided with accommodation at the military facility at Han Pijesak garrison where he was serving. Additionally, both decisions confirm that Mladić had a separate family residence in Belgrade, while the 8 April 1997 decision further indicates that Mladić was “relocated from the Belgrade Garrison, where he had a settled housing issue/permanent housing provided/, to the Han Pijesak Garrison … ”. Therefore, it appears that Mladić was provided with both an accommodation in Belgrade, as well as multiple family separation allowances from the VJ, at least for a period of time in 1994 and 1997.

896.    In conclusion, in relation to housing, the Trial Chamber finds that members of the PCs were treated in the same manner as other VJ soldiers. The Trial Chamber is also satisfied that Vuković took an active role in regulating the housing entitlements for VJ members deployed to the VRS and SVK through the PCs. 
(e) Medical Assistance

897.    Members of the 30th and 40th PCs serving in the VRS and the SVK were entitled to medical insurance in the FRY and were treated in VJ medical facilities located in the territory of the FRY. 

898.    For example, Dragomir Milošević was treated in the Military Medical Academy Hospital (“VMA”) in Belgrade after being wounded during combat activities near Sarajevo in August 1995. Similarly, Radislav Krstić was treated at the VMA for the wounds he sustained in the field. Witness MP-80 testified that the medical centres in the territory of RSK had a relatively low capacity to treat and rehabilitate the seriously injured. Consequently, seriously wounded SVK soldiers were treated in the VMA in Belgrade and some of them were sent for treatment to the RS. The SVK also suffered from a chronic shortage of medical officers and medicines. The VJ therefore provided some medical personnel at the request of the SVK, but according to MP-80, it was insufficient. 

899.    The evidence shows that the VJ provided medical treatment to wounded VRS and SVK soldiers in general and not only to the PCs members. In April 1995, Vuković acknowledged that the VMA in Belgrade was “already overstretched” and that less serious cases of wounded VRS and SVK soldiers “should be treated in local medical institutions, rather than transferred – as they are now – to the VMA”. A month later, Vuković had to issue an order allocating 20 beds from a military barrack in Belgrade to accommodate VRS and SVK wounded soldiers, due to a shortage of beds at the VMA. 

900.    Medical treatment was also provided to PC members for pre-existing medical conditions. For instance, Ratko Mladić was admitted as an emergency patient to the VMA in Belgrade on 14 September 1995, where he underwent medical treatment in connection with a previously diagnosed medical condition. 

901.    In order to receive medical care, each member of the 30th and 40th PCs was required to have a valid medical booklet, which was stamped each time treatment was received. Such medical booklets, in order to be valid, needed to contain an up-to-date stamp certifying the current unit of service of the soldier and his place of residence. 

902.    Family members of the military beneficiaries also received medical care – regardless of whether they stayed in the FRY or joined their relatives serving in the VRS or SVK – and their booklets needed to be stamped every year in order to be valid. 

903.    The Trial Chamber received further evidence that requests were made by the VRS for critical equipment, including medicine. During the SDC session of 10 January 1994, Vuković stated “ logistic support has been the best functioning element in the wretched war, and medical support was the best functioning part thereof. … With the current budget we have managed to provide proper treatment for all the wounded, including those from the RS and RSK. We did not get a single dinar for that”. 

904.    The Trial Chamber is satisfied that members of the PCs and their families were entitled to and benefited from medical assistance in the VJ and the FRY.
(f) Other Benefits

905.    Like other VJ officers, members of the 30th and 40th PCs also enjoyed various benefits, such as compensation for service under difficult conditions, health insurance and housing benefits. 

906.    Service in the VRS and SVK by members of the PCs was considered “service under difficult (or special) conditions” and therefore gave them the right to compensation according to the Law on the VJ. On 3 February 1994, Mladić issued a decision regarding the compensation for military service performed in difficult (special) conditions. The decision was issued pursuant to Article 26 of the Rules of Travel and Other Expenses in the VJ, and “in connection with the implementation” of a 19 October 1993 decision of the Sector for Operations of the VJ General Staff identifying the territory where service was carried out under difficult (special) conditions. Mladić’s decision stated:



All professional officers and NCOs, civilians in the army, officers, NCOs and contract soldiers serving in the Yugoslav Army, deployed in the Army of Republika Srpska, are entitled to compensation for carrying out military service in difficult (special) conditions. 



907.    This decision established that the VRS Main Staff Commander, the Commander of the Air Force and Anti-Aircraft Defence as well as the Corps Commanders of the VRS decided on compensation for all eligible individuals and submitted the decisions to the Accounting Centre of the FRY MOD. 

908.    On 22 March 1994, Vuković issued a decision determining that any active servicemen in the VJ who were performing tasks in “territory where the members of the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres are in service” were entitled to compensation for service “under difficult (special) conditions”. 

909.    The Trial Chamber notes that a decision of the 30th PC on 12 May 1994 granted Mladić compensation for service under difficult conditions, based on the Law on the VJ as well as on a decision issued by Vuković on 22 March 1994. In addition, the compensation was granted and calculated based on the decision issued by Mladić himself as Commander of the VRS on 3 February 1994. MP-5 also testified that he received compensation for service under difficult conditions and that officers in the VRS who were not assigned to the 30th PC did not benefit from the said arrangement. 

910.    A similar procedure applied to the SVK as well. Decisions regarding service in difficult conditions made by the SVK were forwarded through the 40th PC to the Accounting Centre of the FRY MOD so that the benefits could be calculated and paid. Rašeta also testified that his salary was increased by about 15% due to the hardship allowance for his service in the SVK. 

911.    Officers assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs were equally entitled to compensation for unused annual leave, requests for which were made directly to the PCs. Such applications were made in accordance with Articles 99 and 103 of the Law on the VJ. For example, Radivoje Miletić, a member of the 30th PC, requested compensation from the 30th PC for unused annual leave for his time serving in the VRS from 1992 to 1995. His request was granted based on the same legal interpretation of the Supreme Military Court in Belgrade set out above. Other members of the 30th and 40th PCs who were granted compensation for unused annual leave included Mladić, Beara, Popović, Gvero, Pandurević, Galić, Obrenović, Novaković and Čeleketić. All of these decisions were issued based on the Supreme Military Court interpretation of the status of the members of the PCs serving outside the territory of the FRY. 

912.    The evidence shows that VJ officers serving in the SVK were also entitled to reimbursement of travel and other expenses. Vuković issued an order in July 1994 regulating such reimbursements. 

913.    Moreover, members of the PCs were entitled to welfare benefits on the basis of the length of their service in the army. For example, Boro Poznanović, a 40th PC officer, was granted double his serviceable years with respect to welfare benefits for certain periods. 

914.    Finally, there is evidence that members of the 30th PC were entitled to education benefits from the VJ. By means of illustration, Vinko Pandurević, a 30th PC officer, was sent for education at the Yugoslav Army School of National Defence on 30 September 1998. 
(g) FRY Citizenship

915.    There is evidence that, after the war, members of the 30th and 40th PCs could also request to become citizens of the FRY based on their service in their respective PC. To this end, they needed to request that their respective PC issue a certificate of service in the VJ. This allowed the officers to obtain an identification card which then allowed them to become citizens of the FRY. In this way, those officers could continue to receive their salary and other emoluments from the FRY after the end of the war in BiH. Stojan Malčić confirmed that upon his retirement in 1997, he acquired FRY citizenship, which enabled him to enjoy certain monetary rights. Mile Novaković testified that he also obtained FRY citizenship in 1997, more than two years after he moved to the FRY. There is also evidence that shows that family members of deceased soldiers could also obtain a certificate for the purpose of acquiring FRY citizenship. 
9. Termination of Service
(a) Law on Termination of Service

916.    According to the Law on the VJ, the VJ Chief of General Staff had the authority to make decisions regarding the termination of service of professional non-commissioned and commissioned officers up to, and including, the rank of Colonel, as well as of civilian personnel in the Army. The FRY President, in turn, was authorised to make decisions regarding the termination of service of professional soldiers with the rank of General. The decrees issued by the President of the FRY to terminate service were implemented through a decision discharging the soldier from professional military service. 

917.    The Federal Minister of Defence, or a commander authorised by him, carried out decisions regarding the termination of service for professional soldiers and civilian personnel assigned to the MOD. Decisions on termination could only be issued by a superior officer holding the position of regiment commander or higher. The decree or order terminating the military service of a professional soldier could be the subject of a complaint before the VJ Supreme Military Court in Belgrade. 

918.    Article 107 of the Law on the VJ provided the grounds on which VJ personnel could be terminated. Generally, military service was terminated when the professional soldier reached a mandatory retirement age and had completed 40 years of pensionable service. Other grounds for terminating service included cases where a soldier was absent from service for five consecutive days without leave, was given a disciplinary sentence of suspension, after receiving two consecutive negative evaluations, or upon his own request. Military service of soldiers could also be terminated when they acquired at least 30 years of pensionable service when “the needs of service so required”. In this respect, Miodrag Starčević testified that determining the “needs of service” was at the discretion of the authorised officer and could be based on “objective or subjective” reasons. Military service was also terminated in cases of permanent disability. 

919.    The Trial Chamber notes that similar procedures and grounds for the termination of service of members of the VRS and SVK were provided for in the Law on the VRS and the Law on the SVK. 

920.    Pursuant to the Law on the VRS, the RS Minister of Defence had the authority to terminate service for soldiers up to the rank of Colonel, while the RS President could terminate the service of Generals. Moreover, an order issued by the RS Minister of Defence on 16 June 1992 further defined the authority of VRS commanding officers with respect to the termination of military service contracts of their subordinates. In particular, the Commander of the VRS Main Staff was authorised to terminate the military service of active-duty non-commissioned and commissioned officers, up to and including the rank of Lieutenant Colonel. 

921.    Under the Law on the SVK, the “Commander of the Army” and commanding officers had the authority to terminate the service of soldiers up to the rank of Colonel, while the President of the RSK, following recommendations from the SDC, had the authority to terminate the service of Generals. 
(i) Role of Vuković in the Termination of Service Process

922.    The Prosecution argues that Vuković had the authority under the Law on the VJ to terminate the military service of many members of the VJ who served in the PCs, and, in fact, exercised this authority. It submits that Vuković personally terminated the service of the following VJ personnel who served in the 30th PC: Ljubiša Beara, Milutin Skočajić, Stevan Tomić, Mićo Vlaisavljević; and similarly, of the following VJ personnel who served in the 40th PC: Boro Poznanović, Veljko Bosanac, Laza Babić and Rade Orlić. 

923.    The Defence asserts that the final authority regarding termination of service for personnel in the VRS and SVK was within the purview of RS and the RSK, and that such decisions were forwarded to the VJ by the VRS and SVK “exclusively to regulate the status in service” of these personnel. As an example, the Defence refers to the fact that Mladić’s active military service was terminated by decree of the RS President in 2002, not by the VJ. It argues that the VRS Military Post decisions illustrate that their service was regulated by RS legislation. The Defence further asserts that the VJ did not play any role in the process or decision to terminate the military service of personnel in the VRS or SVK and moreover, that the VJ did not attempt to influence any decisions on termination of service adopted by the VRS or SVK. 

924.    The Trial Chamber received evidence demonstrating that as Chief of the VJ General Staff, Vuković personally exercised his authority to terminate the professional military service of members of both the 30th and 40th PCs without any involvement from the VRS or SVK. In cases relating to Generals, military service contracts were terminated by decree of the FRY President. In both cases, service was terminated based on the grounds discussed above under the Law on the VJ including, inter alia, after completing 40 years of pensionable service, or 30 years “when the needs of service so required”, or upon the personnel member’s own request. 

925.    Vuković terminated the military service of the following 30th PC members: Ljubiša Beara, Milutin Skočajić, Stevan Tomić, Mićo Vlaisavljević and the following 40th PC members: Boro Poznanović, Veljko Bosanac, Laza Babić and Rade Orlić. Illustratively, Ljubiša Beara’s military service with the VJ was terminated on 6 August 1997 pursuant to an order issued by Vuković. Beara served in the 30th PC and his military service with the VJ was terminated on the grounds that he had reached the mandatory retirement age and had acquired 40 years of pensionable service. As an example from the 40th PC, Bora Poznavović, who served in the 40th PC as the SVK 7th Corps Commander, was retired by Vuković on 30 June 1998, also because he had reached the mandatory retirement age and had completed 40 years of pensionable service. 

926.    Also the President issued decisions relating to members of the PCs, as illustrated by the fact that Stanislav Galić’s professional military service in the 30th PC was terminated on 30 September 1994 by decree of the FRY President, based on the grounds that he had more than 30 years of pensionable service and that “service requirements” demanded the termination of his professional military service. 

927.    Moreover, the Trial Chamber received evidence that professional military service contracts were terminated in cases where VJ officers refused to be transferred to the 30th or 40th PCs. In this regard, the Trial Chamber recalls its earlier discussion regarding Dane Petrović, a Colonel serving in the VJ 1st Army, whom Vuković temporarily “relieved” from duty in July 1996 after he refused to transfer to the 40th PC. The Trial Chamber further recalls Vuković’s statement at the SDC session of 11 October 1993 regarding “retiring” personnel early if they refused to serve in the PCs provided they had “over 30 years of pensionable employment”. 

928.    Some evidence at first suggests that the final decisions regarding termination of service of members of the PCs did not always fall with the VJ. The Trial Chamber notes in this respect several decrees issued by the President of the RS terminating the service of personnel who served in the 30th PC. The decrees stated they were final and could not be appealed. Such decrees formed the basis for the subsequent implementation of decisions issued by the relevant VRS Military Posts. However, these decrees were issued by the RS President after the 30th PC was already disbanded. Consequently, the VRS decisions in evidence implementing the Presidential Decrees were also issued in 2002, after the 30th PC was abolished. 

929.    Addressing the Defence submissions regarding circumstances of termination of Mladić’s contract, the Trial Chamber notes that on 16 June 2001, Mladić was “removed from the records of VJ professional soldiers” by Decree of the FRY President, along with 25 other personnel members serving in the 30th PC. Miodrag Starčević testified about this decree, explaining that being “removed from the records of VJ professional soldiers” meant that “from that point on, in a formal legal sense they ceased to be professional soldiers in the [VJ]”. 

930.    Subsequently, on 7 March 2002, the RS President issued a decree terminating Mladić’s professional military service. The next day, the decree was implemented by a VRS Military Post decision, as provided for under the Law on the VRS. Miodrag Starčević further testified that due to Mladić’s rank in the VRS, such decisions were under the jurisdiction of the RS President. 

931.    The Trial Chamber notes that both the RS presidential decree and VRS Military Post decision were issued in 2002, after the 30th PC was abolished and after Mladić was removed from the records of VJ soldiers by the FRY President. 

932.    Petar Škrbić testified that while working in the Personnel Sector of the VRS Main Staff, he never received any requests from Vuković for a particular officer to be “pensioned off”. He further testified that he never received any requests for an officer to remain in service after the VRS decided he would be “pensioned off”, stating: “ there was no way for that to be done. Anyone who was to be pensioned off was pensioned off, and no one questioned that decision”. The Trial Chamber notes that the veracity of Škrbić’s testimony is put into question by the numerous examples of orders issued by Vuković terminating military service of VJ soldiers serving in the PCs. 
(ii) Final Findings

933.    The Trial Chamber finds that pursuant to the Law on the VJ, the FRY President and Vuković possessed the authority to terminate the professional military service of personnel assigned to the 30th and 40th PCs. Furthermore, both the FRY President and Vuković exercised this authority, as demonstrated by the numerous examples of decrees and orders terminating the military service of personnel serving in the PCs.

934.    The Trial Chamber further finds that the RS presidential decrees and corresponding VRS Military Post decisions relied on by the Defence to demonstrate that termination of service for members of the 30th PC was only within the purview of the RS and VRS were, in fact, issued after the war and following the disbandment of the 30th PC. As a result, the Trial Chamber is not convinced that this practice calls into question Vuković’s authority to terminate the military service of the members of the 30th PC.

935.    The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence does not support the Defence argument that the decrees issued by Vuković or by the FRY President on termination of service for members of the PCs were preceded by RS Presidential Decrees, nor that such decrees were only issued to regulate status-related rights of the concerned personnel.
10. Removal from Duty

936.    The Prosecution argues that Vuković had the discretion to temporarily remove from duty “persons who committed disciplinary offences/criminal acts damaging to the interests of the VJ” and where he was aware that “a subordinate had committed war crimes; he had discretion to remove the offender from the VJ”. The Defence submits that Vuković did not have this authority. They argue that the Regulations on the Application of International Laws of War in the Armed Forces of the SFRY were only applicable in cases of armed conflict of an international character referrring to Starčević, and that the articles on command responsibility could only be “applied under the condition that it had been enshrined in the FRY Criminal Code, as explained by Gojović”. The Trial Chamber is not convinced that Gojović’s argument affects the general applicability of the Regulations. It further notes that Starčević does not support the Defence argument, but rather states that the Regulations were applicable when the SFRY/FRY was one of the parties to a conflict. The Regulations were therefore applicable to the VJ.

937.    Articles 20 and 21 of the Regulations set out the responsibilty of perpetrators of war crimes, as well as command responsibility for such crimes. According to Starčević, a violation of this regulation could be the basis for invoking removal from duty pursuant to Article 64 of the Law of the VJ. He further stated that the final analysis rested with the person authorised to decide on removal from service and that Vuković had this authority. Removal from duty is a temporary measure pending, for example, criminal proceedings and following the completion of such proceedings, a different procedure for determining if termination could be initiated. 

938.    The Trial Chamber finds that according to the Law on the VJ and the Regulations, Vuković had the legal authority to temporarily remove VJ staff from duty and notes that there is no evidence that Vuković excercised this authority in relation to members of the 30th and 40th PC.
11. Disbandment

939.    At the SDC session of 29 August 1995, the SDC decided to disband the 40th PC in light of the fact that the SVK “ceased to exist” after the loss of the RSK territory to Croatia and there was, therefore, no further need to finance and provide assistance through the PC. The SDC decided that all the officers of the 40th PC involved in the SVK defeat had to write statements on the events that unfolded in their areas of responsibility during the attack from the HVO and submit them to Vuković. Similarly, the SDC instructed the SVK Commander to send Vuković a detailed report on the cause of the “fall” of the western parts of the RSK. Members of the 40th PC who were found to have acted in a “professional and dignified manner” could be reassigned to posts in the VJ or in the 30th PC, with Vuković’s approval. For example, on 29 August 1995, Goran Gajić was transferred from the 40th PC to the 30th PC. 

940.    The 30th PC was disbanded by a decree issued by the President of the FRY on 28 March 2001. After its disbandment, members of the 30th PC serving in the VRS were formally removed from the record of VJ professional soldiers by a decree issued by the FRY President and their status was regulated in accordance with an agreement on special parallel relations between the FRY and the RS of 5 March 2001. 
B. Vuković’s Authority Over the Logistical Assistance Process
1. Submissions of the Parties

941.    The Prosecution argues that Borislav Vuković, as Chief of VJ General Staff, had significant responsibility over the provision of logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK, and exercised that authority pursuant to the decision of the SDC. It posits that Vuković organised the system of cooperation with the VRS and SVK, and was “fully supportive” of FRY efforts to assist these armies. 

942.    Conversely, the Defence generally submits that, under FRY law and procedure, the SDC and FRY MOD—not Vuković and the VJ General Staff—held the primary authority over the logistical assistance process. It argues that “the FRY MOD owned all movable and immovable military property”, “ the VJ only had the right to use the property the MOD allocated to the VJ for usage”, and the VJ “did not have the right to dispose or alienate the property”. The Defence contends that Vuković, being a subordinate in the process, had no control over the decision of the SDC and FRY MOD to give logistical assistance to the VRS, and therefore “cannot be held legally responsible for making governmental policy since he had neither the position nor authority to make policy”. In the Defence’s view, Vuković’s role in the logistical assistance process was essentially limited to giving certain quantities of materiel that would not endanger the VJ’s reserves, pursuant to the orders of the SDC and the authorisation of the FRY MOD. 
2. Coordination and Meetings with VRS and SVK Officials

943.    On 27 September 1993, Vuković presided over a meeting of the VJ Supreme Command Staff attended, inter alia, by the chiefs of the different administrations and sectors, as well as the chiefs of the combat arms and services. Vuković ordered that the VJ “ i mprove the coordination and cooperation with the Army of the Republic of Serbian Krajina and the Army of Republika Srpska”. He instructed that meetings with senior representatives of the VRS and SVK be organised on a monthly basis in order to consider “ assistance in manpower”, “[a]ssistance in equipment and materiel” and “economic assistance”. Vuković added that “ supply of material and technical equipment to the VRS and SVK should be realized in accordance with the real possibilities and only upon the authorization of the Chief of the General Staff of the Yugoslav Army”. Vuković warned that officers unwilling to “develop and care for good interaction and spirit of cooperation” with the VRS and SVK would be dismissed. After the meeting, Vuković issued a memorandum reiterating that, in order to “ improve coordination and cooperation” between the VJ, VRS and SVK, he would “organise meetings once a month” to discuss, inter alia, “[a]ssistance in … equipment and technical materiel” and “[f]inancial assistance”. 

944.    MP-80 testified that these monthly meetings occurred and were held in Belgrade at the offices of the VJ General Staff. Vuković chaired the meetings, which were attended by several VJ generals and by General Ratko Mladić of the VRS and General Milan Čeleketić of the SVK. Mladić and Čeleketić gave presentations explaining the situation in RS and RSK and asking the VJ to assist with the needs of the VRS and SVK. Making the presentation to Vuković was necessary because “nothing could have been done without his knowledge. He couldn’t have been bypassed”. 

945. Mladić’s diary documents his meetings with Vuković and other FRY officials. In addition, on eight or nine occasions between mid-1993 and February 1996, Mladić dispatched Ðorđe Ðukić, the VRS Assistant Commander for Logistics, to Belgrade in order to request weaponry and logistical assistance from Vuković and other VJ General Staff officials. Mladić regularly wrote to Vuković to ask for assistance as well. 

946.    A department of the RSK Defence Ministry was itself part of the representation of the RSK government in Belgrade, and dealt with the procurement and transport of goods for the use of the state and the SVK. 

947.    On 15 March 1994, a meeting was organised in Belgrade between Slobodan Milošević, Zoran Lilić, Ratko Mladić and Radovan Karadžić, among others. Karadžić opined that “ so far cooperation between the VRS and the VRSK i.e., SVK with the VJ and General VUKOVIĆ has been good and correct”. On 13 December 1993 in Belgrade, Karadžić gave a presentation to various FRY and RS high-ranking officials, including Vuković, Milošević and Mladić. Karadžić explained RS’s strategic military objectives, notably separating Serbs from Muslims and Croats, the elimination of the Drina as a border and “to have our part of Sarajevo”, the city being “the key to the war”. Referring to logistical assistance, Milošević emphasised that “General Vuković will give everything that does not jeopardize b/g /combat readiness/ of units here”. At the continuation of the meeting on the next day, Vuković said “ we will help with weapons”. 
3. Establishment of a Procurement and Delivery Procedure

948.    The VJ’s provision of logistical assistance to the VRS became more institutionalised and orderly during Vuković’s tenure as Chief of General Staff. In order to avoid unauthorised transfers of ammunition and equipment, an agreement was entered into between Vuković and Mladić according to which VRS units would submit logistical assistance requests to the VRS Main Staff’s Logistics Sector, which would review all requests, and relay them to the VJ General Staff to obtain Vuković’s approval. 

949.    This procedure is also reflected in a subsequent order from Vuković: “Every month, a work plan by the VJ General Staff shall regulate the issues and time of coordination with the General Staff of the SVK and VRS” and “[a]ll requests to the VJ shall be sent in time only through the VJ General Staff to the specialist organs and representatives, signed by the commanders of the General Staffs of the SVK and VRS, and I shall personally approve those proposed to me by my assistants. Other requests shall not be considered”. Based on this procedure, Vuković refused to consider various requests, such as a direct request from VRS Lieutenant-Colonel Rade Danilović, instructing him to follow the chain of command and process his demand through the VRS Main Staff. Similarly, Vuković’s office declined a request for equipment sent by the RS MUP because the VJ General Staff did not have the authority to review requests from this RS Ministry. 

950.    Ðorñe Ðukić reported that the VJ had denied certain requests to loan equipment because they had been improperly brokered by some VJ unit commanders, deploring: “ We are compelled to completely bar the realisation of the requests relating to promises of some irresponsible individuals from the VJ, who are actually not familiar with the situation regarding weapons and military equipment and VJ resources and made unrealistic promises”. Ðukić added: “In the future, VRS Main Staff will not send to VJ General Staff requests which are not in accordance with realistic potentials of the VJ, repeated requests to which a negative answer has been received, requests for equipment and materiel which VJ also has to buy on the market, as well as for services in institutions which operate on the basis of influx and distribution of earnings”. 

951.    Vuković instituted disciplinary proceedings against certain VJ commanders who had impermissibly given military supplies directly to the VRS and SVK. But he issued an order to replenish the VRS and SVK with material supplies, thereby distinguishing official assistance from the actions of individuals who did not follow the standard procedure.

952.    Mladić instructed VRS members to abide by the procurement procedure established by Vuković. Mladić ordered that no request would be considered or approved without his own signature and that of Vuković or his subordinated command. Mladić forbade VRS units from directly obtaining supplies from the VJ outside the procurement procedure: “I forbid contacting state and other organs and organisations in the FRY for the purpose of collecting material aid for the needs of the VRS without my permission”. “All authorisations, confirmations and other documents for collecting material aid in the FRY for the needs of the VRS units and institutions, issued without my permission, shall be rendered invalid; they shall be retracted and destroyed”. 

953.    The SVK Command issued a similar order:



In spite of orders and many warnings that the security of material supplies from the VJ be done in planned fashion and through the SVK General Staff, there are still instances of commands or individuals directly contacting the VJ General Staff or individual units. Direct contacts without authorisation from the SVK General Staff, give the impression of unorganised and haphazard work, incur unnecessary costs and the requirements of the VJ General Staff and the units are not being met. … Requests to the VJ for material supplies replenishment of the units are to be sent directly to the Corps Command. The Command strictly forbids subordinate commands and individuals to directly contact the VJ General Staff or the VJ units in order to secure material supplies. 



954.    In accordance with the foregoing procedure, requests for assistance approved by Vuković were processed by the relevant organs of the VJ General Staff. Vuković instructed VJ General Staff administrators that requests for logistical assistance should only be granted insofar as they did not endanger the VJ’s reserves, and told Mladić: “I will not give big reserves even at the cost of being replaced … I cannot give you what we do not have”. 

955.    General Mladen Mihajlović, who served as Chief of the Engineering Administration in the VJ General Staff, testified that, between 1993 and 1995, the VRS Main Staff regularly made requests to the VJ General Staff for equipment and materials. Vuković or members of his cabinet would review VRS requests and handwrite notes thereon, stating, for example: “Consider this request”, “ supply this if possible”, “ look into this, consider it”, “ nothing to be given without my approval”, or “ see what can be done”. Vuković would also enter his initials on certain documents. Upon Vuković’s approval, requests were eventually forwarded to the relevant administrators of the VJ General Staff, who assessed the state of supplies and usually did not grant requests in their entirety because of insufficient levels of replenishment in the VJ. Even though the VJ did not usually grant VRS requests in full, Mihajlović explained that it was common for the VJ to approve the delivery of 10,000 mines at a time, for example. Ðorñe Ðukić also testified that Vuković and other officials normally reduced the quantities requested and denied certain requests for weapons and ammunition. 

956.    Once VJ General Staff administrators had evaluated whether a request could be fulfilled, they drafted a document for Vuković’s “consideration and final decision-making”. Civilian trucks then transported equipment secretively to VRS bases in Banja Luka, Koran, Bileća and Bijeljina after avoiding border crossings manned by UNPROFOR observers. According to the UNPROFOR military command, most military supplies from Serbia were funnelled to the VRS and SVK through the Posavina corridor between Tuzla, Northern Bosnia, and Croatia. 

957.    Milomir Kovačević, a truck driver for the Serbian MUP between 14 January 1994 and 4 August 1995, explained how the VJ surreptitiously delivered military supplies to the VRS. The VJ and MUP requisitioned civilian trucks, issued travel permits and ordered them to deliver ammunition, mines, explosives, fuel and food to the VRS. In particular, Kovačević recounted a delivery in March 1994 where the VJ and MUP requisitioned a convoy of 10 to 15 fuel trucks to transport fuel and other goods to RS. The convoy was escorted by all-terrain vehicles bearing VJ license plates. Kovačević and the other truck drivers were told to turn off their lights and take a gravel road built through a forest in the area of Kuzmin and Sid, Serbia, heading towards Sremska Raca, Bosnia. The convoy ultimately reached a large iron gate manned by VJ soldiers. The military personnel did not go farther but ordered the truck drivers to cross a bridge over the Sava River into Bosnia by driving as fast as possible while keeping their lights off in order to evade European Union border monitors, who were situated three kilometres away from the bridge. The convoy was met by VRS and RS Police personnel after it crossed the bridge into RS. Kovačević and his fellow truck drivers were subsequently ordered to deliver their cargo to various locations in RS, including the VRS Kozora barracks in Banja Luka. 

958.    Kovačević also conducted deliveries by crossing the FRY-RS border across the Drina River near Zvornik, RS, taking a special road at night where there were no checkpoints. On several instances, he transported weapons, ammunition, explosives and fuel from Serbia to RS, namely ammunition from the Prvi Partizan company in Užice, as well as automatic rifles and pistols from Kragujevac. Further, while Kovačević was employed by the Partnertrans company in 1994, his truck was requisitioned by the VJ, and he performed deliveries on 10 to 15 occasions pursuant to orders from VJ Major Žarko Slujkić. While Milomir Kovačević’s credibility was called into question when he falsely denied part of his criminal record, namely convictions on two counts of fraud, the Trial Chamber finds that Kovačević’s account of surreptitious border crossings is amply corroborated by separate testimonial and documentary evidence.

959.    A report states that, on 16 June 1995, the VRS made arrangements to take over 22 motor vehicles and 5 trailers from the VJ. This operation was to be conducted by “co-ordination with the VJ Drina Border Division Detachment for providing support at ferry crossing point”. The border crossing was to “be carried out in the sector of the village of Balatun-Cra Bara” because “ illegal crossings are the least frequent there, access roads are good, the Drina River bed has no dunes and the crossing point is easy to close off to prevent the UNPROFOR from coming”. 

960.    Ðukić likewise explained that equipment was secretly transported by civilian trucks to VRS bases in Banja Luka, Koran, Bileća and Bijeljina after avoiding border crossings manned by UNPROFOR observers. Witness MP-14 elaborated on the surreptitious nature of the transportation system, reporting that after the 1993 Orthodox Christmas, the VRS’s Koran Depot sent two trucks to collect military supplies at a VJ depot in Kraljevo in southern Serbia. The trucks were not stopped but rather waved along at both the Serbian and Bosnian borders because the operation had been formally arranged beforehand. The procedure changed when the FRY imposed sanctions on RS, as ammunition was henceforth transported “in secret” through a forest road where there were only VJ patrols but no border checkpoint. 

961.    International monitors had difficulty controlling the FRY-RS border given its length and the terrain. The evidentiary record plainly demonstrates that the border was porous and that it was rather easy for FRY and RS authorities to evade international monitors. After going to RS for a meeting with Mladić on 12 August 1994, Vuković himself remarked “ we have passed through the blockade incognito”. The surreptitious nature of the logistical assistance process is further discussed below. 
4. Supreme Defence Council Decisions on Logistical Assistance

962.    Logistical assistance to the VRS was regularly discussed and agreed upon at FRY Supreme Defence Council meetings attended by Vuković, as well as Slobodan Milošević, President of Serbia, Zoran Lilić, President of the FRY, Pavle Bulatović, FRY Defence Minister, Momir Bulatović, President of Montenegro, and other officials.

963.    On 11 October 1993, the SDC discussed at length the FRY’s difficult financial situation and its negative repercussions on the replenishment of the VJ’s reserves and its overall budget. Vuković briefed the SDC about the situation and acknowledged that the VJ’s aid to the VRS and SVK was affecting the VJ’s resources: “ Our reserves of wartime material which we are now spending … are bringing us into a situation where our combat capacities are declining, and we can’t even help these two republics. … Each day we are using up our reserves but we are not getting a normal inflow of funds; and, secondly, we are helping the armies of the republics of Serbian Krajina”. Yet, Vuković never suggested that the VJ discontinue its assistance to the VRS and SVK despite the problems with the VJ’s funding and resources. Rather, in light of Vuković’s advice, the SDC decided to raise the VJ’s budget to help replenish its reserves. The SDC adopted measures to resolve “problems concerning financing and securing funds for the transformation of the VJ and charged the Federal Government with securing the funds necessary to finance the VJ by the end of the week”. 

964.    On 10 January 1994, the SDC convened to discuss the VJ’s funding. Vuković cautioned the SDC that “the financing of RS and RSK ” had “not been taken into account at all”. “If the war there were to continue”, he noted, “we know that they need to be given certain assistance, beginning with weapons and ordnance and all other materiel”. Vuković stated that 522 million dollars and 307 million dollars were respectively required for the needs of the VRS and SVK. He subsequently pled: “We cannot abandon Ratko and others—they are asking for extremely expensive ammunition they use to fire on land targets. Why? Because it is very effective … ”. 

965.    On 7 February 1994, at the 18th Session of the SDC, Vuković warned that the Law on Property (enacted a few months earlier) “does not give the Chief of General Staff any right to misappropriate [sic] any resource, especially in terms of assistance and specifically now to Republika Srpska and the Republic of Serbia Krajina. All this now should go through the Ministry and Government”. Vuković told the SDC that it should either give him the authority to give logistical assistance to the VRS and the SVK or allow the Law on Property to regulate the logistical assistance process. Vuković advised the SDC to give him that authority because “if the two Krajinas [sic] are not defended, we will be significantly jeopardised. And they certainly can’t be defended without our assistance in weapons and military equipment”. 

966.    Eleven days later, Zoran Lilić directed that, “in accordance with a decision of the Supreme Defence Council”, the VJ “shall supply the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres with weapons and military equipment”. Lilić added: “The Chief of the General Staff of the VJ is hereby authorised to reconcile the requests of the 30th and 40th Personnel Centres with the means of the VJ and specifically regulate the method and procedures for providing the supplies”. Starčević confirmed that the SDC thereby ordered Vuković to provide logistical assistance to the VRS and to the SVK, within the limits of the VJ’s available resources. 

967.    The Defence cites the transcript of the 18th SDC Session for the assertion that “ the Army of Yugoslavia did not have the right to dispose or alienate military property”. The Defence does not mention that Vuković then urged the SDC to give the VJ the authority to give property to the VRS and SVK. The Defence Final Brief also omits any reference to Lilić’s subsequent order giving Vuković that authority following his request. The Trial Chamber finds that the evidence conclusively establishes that the SDC granted Vuković authority over the logistical assistance process.

968.    On 16 March 1994, the SDC again discussed the provision of weapons and military equipment to the VRS and SVK. On 7 June 1994, Vuković personally advised the SDC that logistical assistance to the VRS and SVK was necessary and must continue: “If we stop helping them in the area of education, financing of educated personnel and material assistance for certain combat operations, they’ll start losing territories. ... This means we have to help them somehow”; and “we can’t leave them to their own devices”. Vuković recommended that the SDC approve the grant of ammunition and spare parts to the VRS and SVK. 

969.    On 11 Jly 1994, Vuković and Pavle Bulatović, the FRY Defence Minister, “presented to the SDC the reasons for the materiel requests and personnel-related proposals” of RS and RSK. The SDC went on to decide that “negotiations and the delivery of weapons and military equipment to be used by [RS] and the [RSK] shall only be conducted through the Federal Defence Ministry and the Yugoslav Army General Staff”. 

970.    On 21 July 1994, Vuković equally told the SDC that it was necessary to consider “how much longer we can extend assistance to the [VRS] and [SVK]”. Vuković invited General Blagoje Kovačević of the VJ General Staff to make a presentation to the SDC on the matter. Kovačević noted that, the VJ’s reserves were partially depleted “ b y giving large quantities of weapons, ammunitions, and explosives – 3,640 tonnes” to the VRS and SVK. Vuković later specified that the VJ’s stock of infantry rifle ammunition remained at 110% but that its stock of 60mm and 82mm infantry shells was down to 37%. Vuković did not propose discontinuing military assistance to the VRS and SVK, instead urging the SDC to increase the VJ’s budget: “ It is not possible to send supplies across the Drina river out of these reserves. But that leads to the conclusion that a budget of additional funds for this purpose should be considered”. Slobodan Milošević and Zoran Lilić agreed with Vuković that the VJ’s budget should be raised accordingly, and the SDC went on to reach that conclusion. 

971.    Ratko Mladić attended an SDC meeting in Belgrade six months later on 24 January 1995. Milošević observed: “We are exhausted and have no reserves”, and stressed the need to end the war soon by reaching a peace agreement with favourable terms. Notably, Vuković urged the SDC to continue assisting the VRS in the meantime: “Our backbone over there is the army and we have to give them their mainstay and support”. 

972.    On 7 June 1995, Vuković again encouraged the SDC to keep on authorising the VJ’s assistance to the VRS and SVK: “Allow us, as has been the case so far, to offer certain help to the RS and the RSK, primarily with spare parts and whatever we can give that will not have an impact on FRY’s combat readiness”. 

973.    On 29 July 1995, pursuant to another briefing by Vuković, the SDC decided to “ continue to extend certain assistance to the Armies of RS and the RSK within limits that do not jeopardise the combat readiness of the VJ ”. The SDC agreed that it was “immediately” necessary to “continue extending material and expert assistance to the VRS and SVK, to the extent of VJ abilities”. The SDC also decided that it was necessary to “emphasise in the mass media the legitimate right of the FRY, as their mother-state, to help the survival of the Serbian people west of the Drina”. Vuković participated in several other SDC sessions where the provision of assistance to the VRS and SVK was discussed. 

974.    In sum, these records conclusively demonstrate that the SDC licensed military assistance to the VRS and SVK, and that it granted to Vuković and the VJ General Staff the authority to administer the provision of this assistance. Vuković also opted to refer certain requests to the SDC. For instance, when the RSK MOD asked for “ammunition and mines and explosives free of charge, as soon as possible”, Vuković appended a handwritten note to the request stating “ not without the VSO”, meaning not without the SDC’s approval. 

975.    Slobodan Milošević, who took an active role on the SDC along with Vuković, admitted in 2001 that the FRY had given significant military assistance to the VRS and SVK throughout the war, emphasising “we helped our people with all the resources we had at our disposal”. 

976.    Several Defence witnesses nonetheless posited that Vuković had a limited role in the logistical assistance system. SVK Commander Mile Novaković notably testified that he met with Vuković around September 1993 in order to update Vuković on the essential elements of the situation in RSK and to request materiel and personnel assistance. However, Novaković claimed that the political and military authority in the FRY was in Slobodan Milošević’s hands:



My fate did not depend on General Vuković. … Everything that had to be done was really not referred to General Vuković. If I were to exaggerate I could say that he wasn’t to be asked about anything. Perhaps that wasn’t quite true, but basically none of the decisions were under his authority or jurisdiction. … If the army was supposed to resolve something then he would call his man from his political party, Mr. Lilić, who could possibly have a say in this. He could possibly tell General Vuković something in the sense that some decision would need to be
implemented. 



977.    The Trial Chamber considers that Novaković’s account of Milošević’s role cannot reasonably lead to the conclusion that Vuković had no meaningful role or authority over the logistical assistance process, as the aforesaid evidence demonstrates that the SDC granted him important authority in this area.

978.    An entry in Mladić’s diary concerns a meeting in Belgrade between Mladić, Vuković, Milošević and Novaković on 24 September 1993. A note in the diary indicates that Vuković spoke about “ financial support” without further clarification. Novaković claimed that Vuković meant that there was “insufficient material financial support” and that the VJ did not have the means to assist the SVK with material resources. Novaković further testified that Vuković told him at a prior meeting that, in light of the disastrous state of its reserves, the VJ did not have sufficient reserves to give any ammunition to the SVK and that the VJ did not even have “the basic prerequisites for waging war”. Similarly, Dušan Kovačević, who concurrently held the titles of RS Minister of Defence, VRS Major General and VJ Major General, acknowledged that the VRS received assistance from the VJ and the SDC, although he testified that Vuković would “not give ammunition out of his own reserves” when it threatened the combat readiness of the VJ. 

979.    The Trial Chamber does not find Novaković and Kovačević credible in suggesting that Vuković and the VJ assisted the SVK and VRS to such a limited extent. Besides the foregoing evidence on the organisation of a comprehensive logistical assistance process, extensive evidence shows the VJ’s role in providing important quantities of logistical assistance to these armies pursuant to Vuković’s directives. 

980.    Radojica Kadijević, a retired VJ General who also served in the FRY MOD and a Defence witness, equaly posited that Vuković had no authority over the provision of military supplies to the VRS and SVK. Kadijević stressed that, “[u]nder the law, the [VJ] and the General Staff had no competencies when it came to exports of military equipment, military goods”. Upon being questioned about the reference to “reserves” attributed to Vuković in Mladić’s diary (“[w]e will see how much we can set aside for you from our reserves”), Kadijević stated: “I believe that these are war reserves at the disposal of the [VJ] in its depots, the reserves of materiel in this case”. Nevertheless, Kadijević insisted that Vuković had simply no authority to supply the VRS and SVK with weaponry from the VJ’s military reserves. 

981.    Kadijević likewise affirmed that the FRY Military Technical Institute (VTI) was subordinated to the FRY MOD; and was adamant that “General Vuković could not exercise power over any of the facilities of the VTI”, had no authority over VTI personnel and could not deploy VJ personnel to serve at a VTI facility. Kadijević was subsequently presented with a series of documents demonstrating that the VJ General Staff approved the VRS’s request for a VTI specialist to provide sniper training to VRS soldiers and their instructors at a VTI facility, as further confirmed by Vuković’s handwritten initials and the sniper instructor’s report. Kadijević acknowledged that the sniper instructor was “sent to the 30th Personnel Centre, which is where officers were sent within the [VJ] in order