Statement of Agreed Facts:
The parties have agreed that the following key facts are not in dispute. 


THE ACCUSED BORISLAV VUKOVIĆ 
Borislav Vuković was born on 22 May 1944 in Koštunići, Serbia, in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. After joining the Yugoslav People’s Army, he graduated from the Ground Forces Military Academy in 1966 and became an officer. Shortly after the conflict in the former Yugoslavia began, Vuković became the Chief of Staff and then Commander of the 3rd Army within the Yugoslav Army (“VJ”) based in Niš, Serbia. On 26 August 1993, the President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (“FRY”) appointed Vuković as Chief of the VJ General Staff, a position which made him the most senior officer in the VJ. He held this position until his mandatory retirement from the VJ in 2004, when he became advisor to the FRY government for “the rehabilitation of Serb victims of Albanian persecution” and chairman of the United Serbia Party. 


THE INDICTMENT 
Vuković was charged on the basis of individual criminal responsibility (Article 7(1) of the Statute of the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, hereinafter “the Statute”) with aiding and abetting crimes in the Bosnian towns of Sarajevo and Vlasenica by facilitating the provision of military and logistical assistance from the VJ to the Army of the Republika Srpska (“VRS”). The VRS was an armed group of ethnic Serbs in the Bosnian civil war. Vuković was also charged with superior responsibility (Article 7(3) of the Statute); since he was acquitted of these charges and this part of the decision is not on appeal, however, no further mention will be made of the facts underlying this part of the indictment. 


THE UNDERLYING CRIMES COMMITTED BY VRS 
The underlying events took place in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina in the period between August 1993 and November 1995. 
SARAJEVO From September 1992 to November 1995, the VRS conducted a lengthy campaign of shelling and sniping in Sarajevo which resulted in the deaths of hundreds of civilians and the wounding of thousands of others. 
VLASENICA In the summer of 1995, the VRS invaded the town of Vlasenica, which the United Nations Security Council had previously established as a safe area for civilians. After taking over Vlasenica, the VRS proceeded to forcibly remove and massacre hundreds of Muslim civilians and persons not taking an active part in hostilities. 


THE ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY VUKOVIĆ 
Since August 1993, Vuković oversaw the VJ’s provision of extensive logistic assistance to the VRS as the VJ’s Chief of General Staff. Logistic assistance notably included vast quantities of infantry and artillery ammunition, fuel, spare parts, training and technical assistance. The Supreme Defence Council of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia granted Vuković and the Yugoslav Army the authority to provide logistic assistance to the VRS. Even though Vuković was not officially a member of the Supreme Defence Council, he participated in the Council’s meetings, along with its members, notably Slobodan Milošević and Zoran Lilić, who at the time held the titles of President of Serbia and President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, respectively. Vuković regularly urged the Council to continue providing logistic assistance to the VRS, insisting that they could not wage war without significant military support. A-5 A large number of VRS officers were drawn from the ranks of the Yugoslav Army. They officially remained members of the Yugoslav Army even as they were fighting in Bosnia under the banners of the VRS. Vuković proposed and carefully implemented the idea of creating “Personnel Centres” to regularise the status of these officers and allow them to lawfully remain part of the Yugoslav Army. VRS officers retained their salaries and benefits as Yugoslav Army members through what was known as the 30th Personnel Centre. Vuković was well aware that the payment of salaries was, in his own words, of “great help” to the VRS. 


VUKOVIĆ’S STATE OF MIND 
Vuković knew that the VRS’s operations encompassed grave crimes against civilians. Vuković received information from a variety of sources concerning the VRS’s criminal behaviour and discriminatory intent against Muslims. Under Vuković’s direction, the Yugoslav Army’s intelligence and security organs monitored the views of the international community and international media concerning the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Yugoslav Army General Staff also received diplomatic reports about proceedings at the United Nations Security Council concerning grave abuses against civilians by VRS forces in Sarajevo and other parts of Bosnia and Herzegovina. In particular, Vuković was alerted to the fact that the VRS was conducting a campaign of sniping and shelling against civilians during its siege of Sarajevo. These regular attacks were well documented and widely reported for a period of three years. 


THE TRIAL JUDGMENT 
On 7 January 2014, the Trial Chamber found defendant-appellant Vuković guilty of aiding and abetting the following crimes committed by members of the VRS in Sarajevo and Vlasenica: murder, inhumane acts (injuring and wounding civilians, inflicting serious injuries, wounding, forcible transfer), and persecutions as crimes against humanity; and murder and attacks on civilians as violations of the laws or customs of war. The Trial Chamber sentenced Vuković to a single term of 27 years of imprisonment under Articles 3, 5, and 7(1) of the Statute.


Brief for the Accused:
I. Introduction
1. This appeal concerns a single point of law: whether or not aiding and abetting under Article 7(1) of the
Statute governing this Tribunal requires that the assistance be specifically directed to the commission of a
crime.
2. The prosecution agrees that the defendant must be acquitted if specific direction was required, as the
defendant merely provided unspecific support to the forces committing the crimes on the ground.
3. The Trial Chamber, however, convicted the defendant because it did not consider specific direction an
essential element of aiding and abetting. We urge the Appeals Chamber to overturn this decision because it is inconsistent with prior decisions of the Appeals Chamber, the most fundamental principles of the Statute, and sound policy.
II. “Specific direction” is a component of the actus reus of aiding and abetting
4. The Trial Chamber failed to take into account that aiding and abetting must be specifically directed to assist the commission of crimes. Neutral acts providing general logistic and military assistance to an army engaged in legitimate military operations do not qualify as aiding and abetting.
5. It is true that not all prior decisions of the Appeals Chamber concerning aiding and abetting explicitly mention the element of specific direction. We submit, however, that specific direction has always been implicit in the finding that the accused provided practical assistance to the principal perpetrator that had a substantial effect on the commission of the crime. Specific direction was never in doubt in previous cases because the accused was at or proximate to the crime scene.
6. In contrast, in cases where the conduct of the accused is remote in relation to the commission of the crimes, the requirement of specific direction as an explicit element of aiding and abetting is manifest. This is especially important in this case, as Vuković is not accused of providing assistance to the commission of crimes committed by the VJ. Rather, he is accused of facilitating the commission of crimes committed by the VRS, a separate military organization not under his personal command and not even part of the same command hierarchy.
7. The prosecution relies on the recent Appeals Chamber’s decision in Sainović to argue that specific direction is not a component of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. However, as Judge Tuzmukhamedov stated in his dissent, this issue was not actually relevant for deciding the case in Sainović. Furthermore the facts in Sainović are completely different from the facts at hand. In Sainović the accused aider and abettor Vladimir Lazarević was convicted for providing assistance to members of the VJ while he was a commander in the VJ. Vuković, however, is charged with aiding and abetting the war crimes of a distinct army, i.e. the VRS. Finally, Vuković’s conduct was remote from the place of the crimes, whereas Lazarević was physically present at the crime scene.
8. The additional element of aiding and abetting follows from the general principles governing the ICTY Statute. One of those principles is, as is generally accepted, that the Statute does not criminalise the waging of war per se. States provide military and technical assistance to one another with varying strategic objectives in a number of regions around the world. However, this aid in itself does not render the leaders of the assisting states individually criminally responsible for aiding and abetting crimes committed during such wars. To be held individually criminally responsible, the leaders must be shown to have committed or aided and abetted the commission of some crimes during the war, an act which is distinct, and apart, from the mere provision of military assistance. To conclude otherwise, as the Trial Chamber has done, is to criminalise the waging of war, which is not a crime according to the Statute of the Tribunal. Any provision of weapons would result in the individual criminal responsibility of the provider, approaching a form of strict liability.
9. Moreover, dispensing with the requirement of specific direction, as the Trial Chamber did, leads to absurd consequences. It would potentially ensnare all military and political leaders who approve logistical assistance to a foreign army without the power to control every decision of that foreign army, in particular the intensity of its efforts to curb human rights violations. This would have a substantial chilling effect on all legitimate international military operations. 
III. Conclusion
10. For these reasons, Vuković respectfully requests that the Appeals Chamber: (i) hold that the actus reus of aiding and abetting in international law requires specific direction; (ii) apply that standard; and (iii) reverse the Trial Chamber’s judgment and enter an acquittal.


Brief for the Prosecution:
I. Introduction
1. The defense requests that the Appeals Chamber reverse the Trial Chamber’s judgment on the grounds that the assistance provided by Vuković was not specifically directed at the war crimes committed by the VRS.
2. The defense’s argument is without merit. The Trial Chamber correctly found Vuković guilty of aiding and abetting under Article 7 of the Statute governing this Tribunal because Vuković provided logistical and personnel assistance to the VRS in full knowledge that the VRS committed atrocious war crimes, as Vuković knew fully well.
3. It is irrelevant that none of Vuković’s acts were specifically directed toward the commission of the war crimes by the VRS. Specific direction is not an element of aiding and abetting. The defense’s argument to the contrary is a transparent attempt to introduce a novel, restrictive element to the actus reus of aiding and abetting that has no basis in previous cases and that would make it more difficult to convict those who knowingly facilitate the most grievous crimes. We urge the Appeals Chamber to reject this attempt to undermine the very purpose of this Tribunal to hold to account those responsible for the horrors of the Yugoslav wars.
II. ”Specific Direction” is not a requirement of aiding and abetting liability"
4. If there was ever any doubt about the requirement of “specific direction,” it was laid to rest by the Appeals Chamber’s Sainović decision handed down two weeks after the Trial Chamber’s judgment in the present case. The Sainović decision expressly required “specific direction” as part of the actus reus of aiding and abetting. After an exhaustive discussion of the national and international case law, including all relevant decisions by the Appeals Chamber, the majority, Judge Tuzmukhamedov dissenting, came to the conclusion: “[t]hat ʻspecific direction ʼ is not an element and abetting liability under customary international law.” 
5. The prosecution agrees that the defendant’s physical distance from the crime scene may be relevant for aiding and abetting liability. However, this follows from the simple fact that in these situations the assistance is less likely to have a substantial effect on the main act. The prosecution submits that the proximity of an alleged aider and abettor to crimes committed by the principal perpetrators is one factor that a trial chamber may consider in determining whether substantial contribution is established. If such effect is established, however, there can be no doubt that the assistance qualifies as aiding and abetting if the accused knows that it facilitates the commission of war crimes.
6. Moreover, requiring specific direction would make it almost impossible to prosecute aiding and abetting in practice. The only assistance that is clearly specifically directed at a crime is assistance that cannot be used for anything but criminal activity. It is doubtful whether, in real life, such assistance exists; surely it is rare. There is, however, much conduct that significantly contributes to crime even though it may seem harmless on its face (e.g. transferring money or seconding personnel). Such conduct should not be shielded from criminal liability merely because these acts might further both lawful and unlawful activities. The critical question is whether the assistance was provided with knowledge of the crimes and had an actual, substantial effect on the perpetration of the crime by its beneficiaries. In particular, the provision of weapons as a peculiar kind of assistance is never “neutral.” 
7. The defense submits that under the approach favoured by the Trial Chamber, any provision of weapons would result in individual criminal responsibility of the provider, approaching a form of strict liability. However, this fear is unfounded. In order for aiding and abetting liability to arise, a number of additional elements need to be present: one or more crimes must have been actually perpetrated; the weapons provided must have substantially contributed to the perpetration; and the weapons-provider must have been aware of their likely use. The fact that they could have theoretically been used in lawful activities would not be decisive in this assessment. 
III. Conclusion
8. For too long, the defendant has been able to walk free. He has publicly mocked this tribunal and repeatedly inflamed lingering tensions with inflammatory public statements showing absolutely no regrets about the horrors of the war in general, and the war crimes he supported in particular. The Appeals Chamber should make a strong statement that generals in the headquarters can be as guilty as, or more guilty than, the soldiers on the ground when heinous crimes are committed, and that this Tribunal will prosecute both.
9. For the reasons stated above, the Prosecution respectfully requests that the Appeals Chamber: (i) hold that the actus reus of aiding and abetting in international law does not require specific direction; (ii) and uphold the Trial Chamber’s judgment.